Foreign-Policy-N-Political-Regime.pdf
=====================================

FOREIGN POLICY


AND


POLITICAL REGIME


José Flávio Sombra Saraiva (ed.)


INSTITUTO BRASILEIRO DE
RELAÇÕES INTERNACIONAIS


INSTITUTO BRASILEIRO DE
RELAÇÕES INTERNACIONAIS


Board of Directors


José Flávio Sombra Saraiva (Director)


Antônio Jorge Ramalho da Rocha


João Paulo Peixoto


Pedro Motta Pinto Coelho


Editorial Council


Estevão Chaves de Rezende Martins (President)


Amado Luiz CervoAndrew Hurrel


Antônio Augusto Cançado Trindade


Antônio Carlos Lessa


Denis Rolland


Gladys Lechini


Hélio Jaguaribe


José Flávio Sombra Saraiva


Paulo Fagundes Vizentini


Thomas Skidmor


FOREIGN POLICY


AND


POLITICAL REGIME


José Flávio Sombra Saraiva (ed.)


INSTITUTO BRASILEIRO DE
RELAÇÕES INTERNACIONAIS


P829


Foreign policy and political regime / José Flávio Sombra Saraiva (ed.). Brasília: Instituto
Brasileiro de Relações Internacionais, 2003.


364 р.; 15,5 x 22,5 cm.


ISBN 85-88270-12-9


1. International Relations, Foreign Policy, Political Regimes. I. Saraiva, José Flávio
Sombra. II. Instituto Brasileiro de Relações Internacionais.


ALL RIGHTS RESERVED TO


Instituto Brasileiro de Relações Internacionais (IBRI)
Universidade de Brasília


Caixa postal 4400


70919-970- Brasília, DF


Telefax (61) 307 1655


ibri@unb.br


site:www.ibri-rbpi.org.br


Pinted in Brazil 2003


Legal Deposit made to Fundação Biblioteca Nacional
(Decree 1.825, 12-20-1907)


CDD 327


|  |  |

| --- | --- |

|  |  |

|  |  |

|  |  |

|  |  |

|  |  |

|  |  |

|  |  |

|  |  |

|  |  |

|  |  |

|  |  |

|  |  |

|  |  |

|  |  |

SUMÁRIO


5


|  |  |  |

| --- | --- | --- |

|  |  |  |

|  |  |  |

|  |  |  |

|  |  |  |

|  |  |  |

|  |  |  |

|  |  |  |

6


INTRODUCTION


José Flávio Sombra Saraiva


The containment of international relations within a hard shell,
representing self-confident, complete and finished models, has been a
striking characteristic in the development of this academic discipline.
Turned, most of them, towards forecasting events, these models have
functioned only in the study of new themes and specific problems
proposed by international life. The rationalism of realists and liberals
limited their observation of international phenomena to the view of
the historical process. The radical outcry of post-modernity made some
observers stress sensations and impressions, while others attempted to
strike, within the realm of constructivism, a difficult balance between
rationalism and post-modernity.


However, the end of the Cold War made it clear that most of
these classifications were fallible. And not all the problems of the
discipline could be solved through the negotiation between rationalists
and post-modernists. In different parts of the world new methods
and approaches attempt an original treatment of the subject matter of
international relations. In this respect, the rediscovery of History's value
and the redemption of the comparative experience of societies along
time gains strength, affirming international relations as a promising
discipline in the new century.


It is an honour to be the editor of a book derived from the
preoccupation to enable a plural and cosmopolitan debate over
contemporary international relations. It is void of any theoretical
hindrances that might impede the treatment of its theme in an open
and comparative way, by authors in search of either the most universal
abstractions or the world of Clio.


The main objective of the volume is to review an area immersed
in relative silence within the theoretical trends of international relations:
the foreign policy of States, through its interfaces with the international
society, from the perspective of differences in political regimes. Refused


7


JOSÉ FLÁVIO SOMBRA SARAIVA


by several students who established our field of inquiry, the analysis of
foreign policy developed as a marginal study, far from the heart of
theoretical debate. This work is an attempt to correct this bias, bringing
foreign policies to the core of the theoretical reflection on international
relations, closer to the long tradition of the examination conducted
by historians interested in international relations.


The distance kept by the systemic theories of international
relations not only from foreign policies as a theme but also from their
relations with other variables left the field open to new incursions. In
our view the relative consensus of classic realists and neo-realists, but
also of the liberal theories, suggesting a limited pertinence of the nexus
between concepts of foreign policy and the political regime is a
clamoring oversight.


Now, we deliberately associate the field of foreign policies to
political regimes. The classic studies of foreign policy seem to ignore a
possible relationship between these two themes. In the same way, the
writings on political regimes reveal very little on the possibility of a
connection between the forms of the internal arrangement of the states
and their international behavior. Although there is an intellectual
tradition that finds a natural tie between democratic regimes and a
cooperative posture in foreign policy, this is not an automatic
consequence, and can not be detected in all cases.


Such is the utility of the first part of the book, built around
three chapters written by Andrew Hurrell (Oxford University,
England), Robert Frank (Institut Pierre Renouvin, France) and myself.
Its purpose is to open the debate, listening to historians and
theoreticians, to consider the problems involved in the theme through
the new approach adopted in the way to treat the relationship between
the two concepts, putting them under the light of theory and
historiography of international relations.


The common ground of these three initial incursions is the
mistrust of any automatic correspondence between democracy and a
cooperative attitude in foreign policy. On the other hand, authoritarian
regimes can not be characterized by a natural inclination to make war.
Methodological alternatives are also proposed to solve the problem of


8


INTRODUCTION


isolating factors in the study of foreign policy related to political
regimes. The analytical significance of these relations suffers from the
lack of an effort of approximation to the multiple variables and open
causes. Contrary to the suggestions of many supporters of the
"Democratic Peace Theory”, the focus of the three initial chapters is
the cosmopolitan manner to deal with problems, particularly in what
concerns the attitude of democracies with respect to resorting to war,
as well as the relationship between foreign policy, political regime and
the international society.


The way in which these problems are considered shows the
originality of the book. In the second part, a comparative view is
attempted, with the inclusion of empirical studies aimed at the analysis
of the foreign policy of states from the point of view of their respective
regimes, in different parts of the world, moving from Europe to the
United States, from Latin America to Africa. In Chapters 4 to 12, this
part witnesses the effort to increase the diversity of the experiences
previously referred to.


There is a full range of contributions, each of them addressing
different countries and distinct historical moments, although one
notices a preference for recent times. Some chapters point to specific
moments, such as Didier Musiedlak's (University of Paris I) study of
the foreign policy of Fascism; Vladimir Kulagin's (Institute of
International Relations, MGIMO, Russia) paper on the relationship
between the present political regime of ex-Soviet States and their foreign
policy in the post-Cold War context; or Thomas Skidmore's (Brown
University, USA) evaluation of Brazilian foreign policy during the
Getúlio Vargas regime.


A second group of chapters focused longer historical periods,
expressing the intention to build long-term categories, as the work of
Amado Cervo (University of Brasilia, Brazil) on the paradigmatic
evolution of foreign policy in Brazil and their low causal
correspondence with the history of political regimes of the country. A
similar method is used in the chapters written by Mario Rapoport and
Claudio Spiguel (University of Buenos Aires, Argentina) and Raúl
Bernal-Meza (University of Centro, Argentina), dedicated to identify


9


JOSÉ FLÁVIO SOMBRA SARAIVA


connexions and patterns in the foreign policy of the South American
Cone Sur countries in their relationship with the alternating
authoritarian and democratic political regimes of the region in the
Twentieth and the beginning of the Twenty-First centuries.


An African situation is examined. Wolfgang Döpcke (University
of Brasilia, Brazil) evaluates the two political regimes in South Africa
apartheid and post-apartheid – looking for patterns of external
behavior in two moments so distinct and crucial in the history of that
country. He discovers continuities and changes in the relationship
between the two basic concepts studied in this book. In particular, he
suggests some continuities that seem to negate generalizations on the
relations between “hard” regimes and external policies aiming at
violence and the disturbance of patterns of mutual respect considered
as acceptable by the international society. The chapter written by Denis
Rolland (University of Strasbourg, France) is somewhat different from
the others, as the author prefers to explore documents, in several
European sources, to assist his research on the theme discussed in the
book.


One must register, finally, the support given to the international
research project that made it possible to prepare this book. For two
years we had a fruitful dialog between scholars, with preparatory
meetings and endless electronic exchanges until the final adjustment
of the texts was reached in a working seminar held in the University of
Brasilia, in May 2003. Without the support of this University, and
the institutional efforts of the Universities of Oxford and Strasbourg,
we would not have completed the present opus. Three Brazilian
agencies that support research – CAPES, CNPq and the Alexandre de
Gusmão Foundation, helped decisively. A final word of thanks to the
International Commission of International Relations History, headed
by Brunello Vigezzi (University of Milan, Italy), for including this
project in its agenda.


Brasília, Brazil, October 2003


10


PART ONE


FOREIGN POLICY
AND


POLITICAL REGIME:


THEORY AND HISTORY


1


IS IT POSSIBLE TO ESTABLISH A CAUSAL NEXUS
BETWEEN FOREIGN POLICY AND POLITICAL REGIME?


José Flávio Sombra Saraiva


The central concern of this paper is the possible relationship of


two key concepts in understanding both the political history of states
and the construction of contemporary international relations. Appealing
to these two concepts is a strong and long academic tradition. But
there remains a lack of understanding of the relations between them.
Political regimes and foreign policies, as connected concepts, have not
yet received an open and pluralist treatment with a comparative approach.


The aim of this paper is to contribute to the discussion through
theoretical reflection and historical cases studies. The main argument
is that there is no universal causal nexus between foreign policies and
regime type. But this does not mean that there are no connections
between the two concepts. The existence of a democratic regime does
not necessarily imply a cooperative and ethical foreign policy, while a
authoritarian regime is not naturally directed towards a external war.
Additional complexities, such as the need for the inclusion of other
factors, variables and precise historical conditions, must be taken into
account if a more accurate balance is required.


This paper is divided into two sections. The first discusses how
these two concepts have had a distinct intellectual history. But it also
includes some remarks on the convergence of the concepts. The second
part will examine some of the temptations of reductionism, especially
among those who have emphasized a direct link between democratic
regimes and cooperative foreign policies. The conclusion evokes some
cautious theoretical and methodological remarks that emerge from
confronting the two concepts.


13


JOSÉ FLÁVIO SOMBRA SARAIVA


Two CONCEPTS, MANY INTERPRETATIONS AND MODEST CONNECTIONS


It could be argued that there exists, within the field of Political
Science a large amount of academic work which aims at understanding
the main features of political regimes. The classical definition of a
political regime as a set of institutions which regulate both the struggle
for power and its conservation, as well as the practice of values which
provide life to these institutions, has been constantly scrutinized. 1 The
study of fascism and of fascist regimes occupied a central place in the
discussion of political regimes both in Political Science and History.
The question of how democracy could carry within itself the seeds of
totalitarian regimes has also been examined in some detail. 2 Evaluations
on Latin American experiences have provided a intellectual tradition
of how to deal with the transitional processes of authoritarian regimes
towards a more democratic life. An established literature on
democratization of political regimes can be found on many shelves of
university libraries all over the world.


At the same time, discussions on the nature and structure of
political regimes, particularly on the way of organizing and selecting
ruling classes, as well as on the formation of political will, have marked
the evolution of the concept of political regimes. These academic works
are characterized by a range of different views and ideological
perceptions. The intimate relationship between a political regime and
particular values has also been a privileged area of study. The causal
nexus between regime structure and system of values has been one of
the favorite topics within the liberal traditions of Political Science.


1 Bobbio, Norberto, Matteucci, Nicola, Pasquino, Gianfranco, Dicionário de política, Brasília:
Editora da UnB, 1991, v. 2, p. 1081.


2 An updated bibliography is provided by the paper of Didier Musiedlak for the 2003
Brasilia Seminar. See Musiedlak, Didier. "Fascism, Fascist Regimes and Foreign Policies".
3 Skidmore, Thomas, Politics in Brazil, 1930-1964: An Experiment in Democracy, New
York: Oxford University Press, 1967; Skidmore, Thomas, Politics of Military Rule in Brazil,
1964-1985, New York-Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1988; Stepan, Alfred, The
Military in Politics, Changing Patterns in Brazil, Princeton: Princeton University Press,
1971; Stepan, Alfred (ed.), Authoritarian Brazil. Origins, Policies and Future, New Haven,
London: Yale University Press, 1973; Stepan, Alfred, Democratizando o Brasil, Rio de
Janeiro: Paz e Terra, 1988.


14


IS IT POSSIBLE TO ESTABLISH A CAUSAL NEXUS BETWEEN FOREIGN POLICY AND POLITICAL REGIME?


The Marxist tradition has shown an incompatibility with state
rationalist theories. By emphasizing the causal nexus between a given
evolution of a mode of production and the corresponding political
structure, most Marxists have denied the relative autonomy of political
power. 4 On the other hand, state rationalists have demonstrated how
the behavior of political regimes also depends on a certain system of
states. And Duverger has suggested that political regimes also depend
on the particular character of the party system. 5


Taxonomy of regime types has been a focus of the classical debate
at least since the emergence of the Aristotelian tension between 'good'
and 'bad' political regimes: monarchy, aristocracy and democracy versus
tyranny, oligarchy and demagogy. Montesquieu's taxonomy (republic,
monarchy and despotism) subverted Aristotelic classification in favor
of a more enlightened reasoning, focusing on the combination of
'nature and principle of rule'.


Classical approaches to regime types, concentrating on criteria
such as the number of rulers (Aristotelian classification) and the power
struggle resulting from the structure of the regime (new-Aristotelian
views), have been challenged by modern and post-modern theoretical
contributions. Other modern taxonomies, focusing on the process
and conditions in which political life exists, have also provided
significant contributions to the debate. These are concerned more with
the ways in which power is conquered and maintained than with the
criteria of formal aspects of political institutions. Regime conservation
and change depend also on the social and political conditions in which
power struggle occurs. 6


4 Despite this general view on marxist political thought, works of Gramish and Miliband
have proposed a certain level of autonomy to the political sphere.
5 Duverger, Maurice. Partidos Políticos. Brasília: Editora da UnB, s.d.


6 See, for exemple, this type of analysis in Vladimir Kulagin's paper for the Brasilia Seminar.
See also his adoption of an interesting liberal classification of regime type based in data and
indicators of the Freedom House annual surveys. For what he calls "pratical purposes of
analysis", political life resulting from the independence process after the disintegration of
the Soviet Union in 1991 form three clusters of political regimes: "free", "partly free" and
"not free". See Kulagin, "In Search of a Causal Nexus between Political Regimes and
Foreign Policy Strategies in the Post-Soviet Enviroment".


15


JOSÉ FLÁVIO SOMBRA SARAIVA


Despite relevant development within Political Science, there
remains a lack of concern about the causal nexus between political
regimes and regime changes on the one hand and foreign policies on
the other. In spite of a certain consensus that international conditions
play a relevant role in defining a regime type, there hardly exists an
academic tradition in Political Science dedicated to this issue.


There is a similar problem also in theoretical and historical
traditions concerned with the study of international relations. Foreign
policies of modern and contemporary states have been considered
irrelevant by a large number of authors dedicated to theory. From the
English School to the new constellation in international relations
thinking structured around the polar distinction between “rationalists”
and “reflectivists”, foreign policy has been underestimated as a matter
of interest in the construction of the theory of international relations.


The English School of International Relations, particularly
epitomized by the contributions of Martin Wight, Hedley Bull,
Herbert Butterfield and Adam Watson in the context of the British
Committee on the Theory of International Politics, clarified the
concepts of "states-system” and “international society by rejecting
analyses which concentrated on foreign policies.7 Hedley Bull, in
particular, insisted on the need to keep a conceptual distance from the
"short-term approach to foreign policy-making".8


The same could be said about the traditional realist or neo-
realist approaches of Hans Morgenthau, Henry Kissinger and Kenneth


7 As Martin Wight clearly put it in his essay on "Why is there no International Theory?",
published later in his Diplomatic Investigations, the thesis was to "clarify the idea of a states
system and to formulate some of que questions or propositions which a comparative study
of states systems would examine". See Butterfield, Herbert and Wight, Martin (eds),
Diplomatic Investigations: Essays on the Theory of International Politics, London: Allen and
Unwin, 1966; Wight, Martin, Systems of States, Leicester: Leicester University Press, 1977;
Bull, Hedley. The Anarchical Society: a study of order in world politics, London: Macmillan,
1977; Bull, Hedly and Watson, Adam (eds), The Expansion of International Society,
Oxford, Clarendon, 1984; Watson, Adam, Evolution of International Sociey, London:
Routledge, 1992.


8 Bull, Hedley. Kissinger: The Primacy of Geopolitics, 56, 1980, p. 487.


16


IS IT POSSIBLE TO ESTABLISH A CAUSAL NEXUS BETWEEN FOREIGN POLICY AND POLITICAL REGIME?


Waltz. The most preeminent liberal tradition has also emphasized its
distance vis-à-visthe problem of foreign policies. 10 Marxist-orientated
theories, focusing on the so-called “world-system” – from Samir Amin
and Immanuel Wallerstein to some variants of Latin American
dependency theory – have enshrined a center-periphery conception
which rejects a relative degree of foreign policy autonomy.11 Despite
some difficulties mentioned by social constructivists like Alexander
Wendt in relation to foreign policies, some modest advances have been
made in this issue. 12


Despite this frustrating account on the treatment of foreign
policy in the field of International Relations, the picture is not quite as
bad as it appears. Some studies of the relation between foreign policies
and political regimes have received considerable attention, both within
traditional approaches to foreign policies13 and also in recent analytical
theoretical literature on international relations. 14


Let us concentrate on reconciling the two concepts in the two
historical and theoretical traditions. Although the connection between
foreign policies and political regimes has not been the core of their
arguments, both traditions have provided some interesting insights
into the issue. The first one proceeds from historical research undertaken


9 Kissinger, Henry, Diplomacy, Waltz, Kenneth, Theory of International Relations, New York:
Random Hourse, 1979.


10 Keohane, Robert and Nye, Joseph (eds), Transnational Relations and World Politics,
Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1971; Keohane, Robert, After Hegemony: Cooperation
and Discord in the World Political Economy, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1987.
11 Amin, Samir; Wallerstein, Imanuel, The Modern World System, New York: Academic
Press, 1977.


12 Wendt, Alexander, Social Theory of International Politics, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1999.


13 See, for example, Wallece, W., Foreign Policy and the Political Process, London, Macmillan,
1977, Stremlau, JJ (ed), The Foreign Policy Priorities of Third World States, Boulder, Westview
Press, 1982; Clarke, Michael. British External Policy-making in the 1990s, London:
Macmillan/Royal Institute of International Affairs, 1992, particularly the chapter entitled
"The politics of Thatcherism", p. 230-242.


14 See the coment by Andrew Hurrell upon Andrew Moravcsik liberal views on the
relations between liberal theory and domestic politics. Hurrell, Andrew, "Political Regimes
and Foreign Policies: An Introduction", chapter 2 of this book.


17


JOSÉ FLÁVIO SOMBRA SARAIVA


by various European schools of the History of International Relations.
The second emerges from the vision of various Latin American scholars
dedicated to empirical research and to the construction of foreign policy
paradigms.


A classical contribution on how to examine the conjunction of
the two concepts was provided by the French and Italian historiography
of international relations. Pierre Renouvin's pioneering works provide
some interesting insights into the reconciliation of the two variables
of “international society” and “domestic factors”. Renouvin was
particularly keen on the idea that social scientists should not isolate
factors in their search for a causal nexus in international relations. 15
This argument was clearly stated already in 1953:


Rôle des conditions géographiques, des intérêts économiques
ou financiers et de la technique des armaments, des structures
sociales, des mouvements démographiques; impulsion donnée
par les grand courants de pensée et par les forces religieuses;
influences exercé par le comportemente d'un peuple, son
tempérement, sa cohésion morale: ce sont des points de vue que
nous avons toujours eus présents à l'esprit. Nous n'avons pourtant
pas négligé le rôle des hommes de gouvernement qui ont subi,
plus ou moins consciemment, l'influence de ces forces, on essayé
de les maîtriser dans la mesure où elle a modifié le cours des
relations internationales. 16


The humanist and pluralist methods of the French and Italian
historians of international relations could be viewed as being so flexible
that they did not allow the precise conceptualization of specific themes.
This failure, one might argue, could diminish the contribution of the
Renouvinian tradition to the understanding of the relation between
foreign policy and political regime. On the other hand, multifactor


15 Renouvin, Pierre. Histoire des relations internationales, Paris: Hachette, 1994, v. I,
"Introduction générale", p. 12. Renouvin says that the social scientist "ne doit pas 'isoler'
un aspect de la realité, et qu'il a le devoir de chercher partout sans opposer les sujets
'majeurs' aux sujets 'mineurs' - les éléments d'une explication."


16 Renouvin, Pierre, op. cit., p. 12.


18


IS IT POSSIBLE TO ESTABLISH A CAUSAL NEXUS BETWEEN FOREIGN POLICY AND POLITICAL REGIME?


causal analysis and the umbilical relations between “international society”
and “domestic factors", as proposed by Renouvin and Duroselle, opened
the door for concrete and sophisticated case studies that tested and
analysed the connections between foreign policies and political regimes.
Brunello Vigezzi's book on the relations between Italian foreign policy
and public opinion suggests an innovative approach to analyzing
totalitarian regimes and their foreign policy:


L'influenza del fascismo sugli studi di politica estera è
notevele. Il contrasto tra fascisti e antifascisti conserva tutto il
suo peso. Ma questo non togli che i vari autori avvertano il nesso
fra politica e storiografia in modo più approfondito e insieme più
flessibile. (...) La politica estera così è vista come parte integrante
di um Stato e di uma società: riprendendo su scala larghissima
gli insegnamenti della storiografia europea, cercando di trovare il
punto d'incontro fra storia sociale (e delle classi dirigenti), delle
mentalità, delle dottrine politiche, della cultura, badando a servirsi
delle fonti più diverse, adoperandosi per conciliare breve e lungo
periodo, analisi delle strutture e delle decisioni.17


This combination of long and short-term analysis, as well as of
structure and decision-making has also been shared by some Latin
American scholars discussing the relation between regime type and
foreign policy. They have benefited from the traditional debate within
the region in $20^{th}$ century Latin America on the features of authoritarian
and democratic regimes. Forming a heterogeneous group of scholars,
who have been less dependent on American theories of International
Relations and who have also tried to revise dependency theory, these
Latin-Americans have been dedicated mainly to explaining patterns of
continuity and change in Latin America's international insertion. 18


17 Vigezzi, Brunello, Politica estera e opinione pubblica in Italia dall'Unità ai giorni nostri:
orientamenti degli studi e prospettive della ricerca, Milan: Jaca Book, 1991, p. 14.
18 See some of these authors: Cervo, Amado, Relações Internacionais da América Latina:
velhos e novos paradigmas, Brasília: IBRI, 2001; Cervo, Amado & Bueno, Clodoaldo,
História da política exterior do Brasil, Brasília: Editora da UnB/IBRI, 2002; Saraiva,
José Flávio S., O lugar da África: a dimensão atlântica da política exterior do Brasil,


19


JOSÉ FLÁVIO SOMBRA SARAIVA


A search for a middle course of analysis between the acceptance of
changing patterns of “international society on one hand and the use
of a flexible and “multiple domestic factors” on the other is the hall-
mark of this non-orthodox way of dealing with the relations between
foreign policies and regime type.


The pluralism of this second approach has produced a range of
different views of the present topic. On one hand, Cervo's multi-causal
analysis of Brazil's international relations and the paradigmatic analysis
of its foreign policy suggest the prevalence of foreign policy continuity
across the change of regimes. He also highlights change in foreign
policy in a situation of regime continuity. 19 This relative irrelevance
of regime type, as an isolated concept, to the evolution of Brazil's
foreign policy is also shared by the American historian Thomas
Skidmore in his examination of the Vargas Era (1930-1945), who
concludes:


type regime was not a significant factor in the development
or conduct of foreign policy in Brazil during this period. The
reason (...) is that most Brazilians as may not be surprising in


Brasília: Editora da UnB, 1996; Rapoport, Mario, Crisis y liberalismo en Argentina, Buenos
Aires: Editores de América Latina, 1998; Rapoport, Mario, El laberinto argentino: política
internacional en un mundo conflictivo, Buenos Aires: Eudeba, 1987; Paradiso, José, Debates
y trayectoria de la politica exterior argentina, Buenos Aires: Grupo Editor Latinoamericano,
1993; Moura, Gerson, Sucessos e ilusões; relações internacionais do Brasil durante e após a
Segunda Guerra Mundial, Rio de Janeiro: FGV, 1991; Bandeira, Moniz, Estado nacional e
política internacional na América Latina: o continente nas relações Argentina-Brasil (1930-
1922), Brasília: Editora da UnB, 1993; Hirst, Mônica, O pragmatismo impossível: a política
externa do segundo governo Vargas (1951-1954), Rio de Janeiro: FGV, 1990; Albuquerque,
José Augusto G. (org.), Sessenta anos de política externa brasileira: crescimento, modernização
e política externa; diplomacia para o desenvolvimento, São Paulo: USP, 1996; Bernal-Meza,
Raúl, América Latina en la economía política mundial, Buenos Aires: Grupo Editor
Latinoamericano, 1994; Cervo, Amado & Döpcke, Wolfgang (orgs.), Relações internacionais
dos países americanos; vertentes da história, Brasília: Linha Gráfica, 1994; Doratioto, Francisco,
Espaços nacionais na América Latina; da utopia bolivariana à fragmentação, São Paulo:
Brasiliense, 1994; Tomassini, Luciano, Transnacionalización y desarrollo nacional em América
Latina, Buenos Aires: Grupo Editor Latinoamericano, 1984.


19 Cervo, Amado, "Political regimes and Brazil's foreign policy", chapter 12 of this
book.


20


IS IT POSSIBLE TO ESTABLISH A CAUSAL NEXUS BETWEEN FOREIGN POLICY AND POLITICAL REGIME?


an enormous, sparsely populated country where most citizens
lived far from its borders  did not consider foreign policy
important to their daily lives or well being. They preferred to
think of Brazil as a world unto itself. They were content, by and
large, to delegate responsibility whether consciously or otherwise,
for foreign policy making to their head of state and a few men
gathered around him, bolstered by representation from key
ministers and the higher military.20


Wolfgang Döpcke's analysis of the South African case also stresses
continuity in foreign policy behaviour, transcending the two regimes
studied (apartheid and post-apartheid). These continuities derive from
South Africa's economic insertion into the region, its potential economic
hegemony, and the articulation of economic interests in South Africa's
foreign policy behaviour. Furthermore, he argues that “South Africa's
economic hegemonic potential was not always and exclusively
instrumentalized for political aims, i.e. as a weapon to drive African
states into submission, but was also driven by genuine economic
interests like the search for markets. "21


On the other hand, conclusions of this type do not seem to fit
the Argentinean case, according to Rapoport's and Spiguel's historical
narrative of the relation between foreign policy and regime type in
different stages of Argentina's evolution. Although they do not follow
those who see an automatic causal nexus between the so-called  erratic'
course of Argentina's foreign policy and regime change, 22 they would
not deny the fact that the changing patterns of the State and its
international insertion have had some influence on regime type in
different moments of Argentinean history.


20 Skidmore, Thomas, "Brazilian Foreign Policy Under Vargas, 1930-1945", chapter 11 of
this book.


21 Döpcke, Wolfgang. "Foreign Policy and Political Regime: the case of South Africa",
chapter 10 of this book.


22 Like Juan Lanús and Carlos Escudé. See Lanús, Juan, Aquel apogeo. Política internacional
argentina, 1910-1939, Buenos Aires: 2001; Cisneros, A. & Escudé, Carlos, Historia general
de las relaciones exteriores de la República Argentina. Buenos Aires: 2000.


21


JOSÉ FLÁVIO SOMBRA SARAIVA


Rapoport's and Spiguel's argument in favor of a more detailed
history of the connection between political regime and foreign policy
represents the core of the study of the social-historical nature of the
state. As they clearly put it:


investigar la relación entre políticas exteriores y regímenes
políticos en la Argentina supone, además de enfocar las lazos entre
política exterior y política interna, analizar las transformaciones y
vaivenes de los regímenes políticos en su íntima y a veces contradictoria
vinculación con la naturaleza socio-histórica del Estado, el proceso
de su formación y la estructura económica de la sociedad. Esta
estructura incluye las formas de su inserción mundial a lo largo
de los distintos períodos de la historia argentina contemporánea. 23


To conclude this part of the paper, it is important to observe
that, despite the divergent intellectual history of the two concepts,
some areas of convergence can be identified. Ideas and papers prepared
by the scholars who attended the 2003 Brasilia Seminar have shown
that this topic could be a good way of developing new areas of research
in International Relations.


Three reductionist temptations: to keep invisibility, to define
democratic regime as synonymous with cooperative foreign policy,
and to concentrate exclusively on the single question of war and peace.


There are three temptations when scrutinizing the links between
political regimes and foreign policies. The first is to consider these
connections as irrelevant factors in the understanding of international
politics. They remain invisible when this topic is referred to in the
predominant theoretical agendas. Despite the epistemological silence,
we consider necessary to stimulate new approaches.


Although we cannot deny the quasi-hegemony of the realist
and neo-realist traditions in International Relations, particularly as
reflected in the historically self-confident rationalism of the realpolitik


23 Rapoport, Mario & Spiguel, Claudio, "Modelos económicos, regímenes políticos y
política exterior Argentina", chapter 8 of this book.


22


IS IT POSSIBLE TO ESTABLISH A CAUSAL NEXUS BETWEEN FOREIGN POLICY AND POLITICAL REGIME?


school, we should advance new possibilities to the general discussion
of the discipline. A crucial question is: why should we include this
dimension. Hurrell has answered it in a very precise manner: “What
sort of theory of international relations is it that can tell us nothing
about the evolving international behaviour of even very dominant states
over very long periods of time.”24


The next problem is posed by the difficulty to include the
links between foreign policies and political regimes within the general
scope and definition of the discipline. This is exactly where the second
type of reductionism shows up. Some institutional liberal approaches
do recognize this relationship in principle, but do not pay much
attention to it in practice. The emphasis on institutional frameworks
and institutions that influence relations between the different actors
implies a degree of indifference towards regime type.


Nevertheless, recent studies, which reflect a certain liberal flavour,
have noted the growing significance of regime values for foreign policy.
Vladimir Kulagin has referred to the interesting article of his colleague
Dmitry Furman on the antiterrorist coalition between Russia and the
Western countries:


Our integration with the West is not a problem of foreign
policy choice. It is a problem of our domestic development, which
under the current regime keeps us farther and farther away from
the West. Sometimes in future the regime will change and our
differences with the West will convert from differences of diverse
political 'species' into national peculiarities within a framework
of the same species. And only then it would be possible to make
not a situational alliance against a common enemy, but just an
alliance, leading to integration of Russia into the system of
relations that function in the Western world. 25


24 Hurrel, Andrew, op. cit.


25 Furman, Dmitry, 'Friendship Against', Obshaya Gazeta, 6 December, 2001; apud Kulagin,
Vladimir, "In Search of a Causal Nexus between Political Regimes and Foreign Policy
Strategies in the Post-Soviet Enviroment", chapter 5 of this book.


23


JOSÉ FLÁVIO SOMBRA SARAIVA


This quotation demonstrates perfectly that, despite the on-going
predominance of a realpolitik tradition among Russian specialists on
theories of international politics, some Russian internationalists have
also been attracted by the Democratic Peace Theory. This same way of
reasoning could also be observed in Latin America today, even among
liberally inspired Brazilian specialists on theories of international politics.


For them, as for Kenneth Benoit26 and Kurt Taylor Gaubatz, 27
liberal democracies are really more pacific. This defense of the natural
commitment of democratic liberal states to cooperative and peaceful
attitudes and behaviour is the core of the general proposition. Despite
some cautious remarks and domestic quarrels between several authors,
this tradition cannot disguise its dependence on a Western model
which implies an unified view of democratic government. As Hedley
Bull once said about this sort of analysis: it grows from “analysis to
advocacy".


The core of the Democratic Peace Theory is the argument that,
despite the failure of past empirical studies to establish that democracies
are less prone to conflict, democracies have structural and ideological
reasons to act with less hostility toward other nations. In republican
regimes, it is argued, decision-making is diffused, and those bearing
the burden of costly wars are in a position to prevent unpopular
involvement in foreign conflicts. 28


Inspired in some modern interpretations of Kantianism in
International Relations theory, the defenders of this tradition have
stressed such aspects as civilian control of the military as well as the
generalized tendency of democracy to foster powerful norms against
the use of violence as a means of conflict resolution. Moreover, a basic
tenet of Democratic Peace Theory is that disputes can be resolved
through institutionalized channels without resorting to force. Lethal


26 Benoit, Kenneth, "Democracies really are more pacific (in general): Reexamining Regime
Type and War Involvement, The Journal of Conflict Resolution, 40 (4), 1995/6,  . 636-657.
27 Gaubatz, Kurt Taylor, “Democratic States and Commitment in International Relations”,
International Organization, 50 (1).


28 Benoit, Kenneth, op. cit., p. 637.


24


IS IT POSSIBLE TO ESTABLISH A CAUSAL NEXUS BETWEEN FOREIGN POLICY AND POLITICAL REGIME?


violence is considered illegitimate and even unnecessary, a norm that is
believed to hold between, as well as within, democratic societies. 29


This reductionism should be avoided. The recent Anglo-
American invasion of Iraq could be taken as an important alert about
the presence, in the heart of the US democracy, of a neo-conservative
strand of thinking and policy which is providing much of the intellectual
framework for America's foreign policy, but which is also an interesting
example of how hard it is to establish a direct causal nexus between
democracy and foreign policy.


Furthermore, as is noted by Christopher Coker, following
William James' philosophy of action, it is hard to reconcile a “pure”
democratic theory of international institutions with the final element
of James' proposition on American values projected into foreign policy:


The final element in James' philosophy of action is 'will'
itself. For effort would be of little avail if it were no more than a
blind will to power. Our efforts must be governed by our purposes
and our purposes, in turn, must be framed in the light of our
beliefs. A belief, which has nothing to do with conduct, is not a
proper belief. Our conduct, however, must be informed by ideas.
In the end, we hold our beliefs through our will to believe. Few
American policymakers of importance ever doubted the veracity
of their convictions even in the darkest moments of their history. 30


The third reductionist temptation, to which this debate has been
continually exposed, is the link between the two concepts, on one
hand, and the issue of war, on the other. On these predominant views,
foreign policy is often reduced to the dicotomy between peace and
war. Other considerations are pushed into the backgroud or ignored.
Connections between political regime and foreign policy do not operate
in a vacuum. And this connection should not be seen in a linear way as
cause and consequence. On the contrary, it is difficult to advance this
point if other elements are not involved at the core of the discussion.


29 Idem, p. 638.


30 Coker, Christopher, "The continuity of American Foreign Policy", chapter 7 of this book.


25


JOSÉ FLÁVIO SOMBRA SARAIVA


State structures, political identities, images, struggle for power, party
systems, changing patterns of the international society, the quest for
development, long-standing political perceptions of the global
environment by local and international elites and organized and non-
organized social groups: all of these interconnected factors need to be
considered, although without a deterministic or functionalist automatic
of reasoning.


Political regime is not only a “category of analysis with which
to understand political power. And foreign policy is not only related
to the general theory of policy-making. As Wolfgang Döpcke has noted
in the South African case (as well Cervo, Bernal-Meza31 and Rapoport
and Spiguel), there is a linkage that covers many forms of interaction
between domestic and external conditions. One serious limitation of
the Democratic Peace Theory is it's avoidance of these other social and
economic dimensions of foreign policy.


CONCLUDING REMARKS


Three concluding remarks can be made, presenting some open,
final questions to the debate. Firstly, it is hard to find a straight and
mechanical nexus between foreign policies and political regimes as a
general abstraction. Appreciations of several historical experiences have
shown that other domestic and international factors should be
considered for an accurate balance of factors, variables and determinants.


The range of different historical experiences which will be
covered by these initial studies demands the continuation of this
research project. In this sense, more theoretical insights and further
case studies are required if a new path of knowledge is to be achieved.
It will be necessary to consider the type of work realized by Denis
Rolland, highlighting interesting conclusions on foreign policy and
“the internet or the absence of European specificity”. 32


31 Bernal-Meza, Raúl. "Política Exterior de Argentina, Chile y Brasil: perspectiva comparada ,
chapter 9 of this book.


32 Rolland, Denis, "Political Regimes and International Relations in the Twentieth-Century:
Is there a European Specificity?", chapter 6 of this book.


26


IS IT POSSIBLE TO ESTABLISH A CAUSAL NEXUS BETWEEN FOREIGN POLICY AND POLITICAL REGIME?


The second concluding remark deals with a point suggested in
the introductory phrase of Frank's paper. The new path of knowledge,
which must be developed, will imply a new methodological attitude.
Historians are looking towards theories of International Relations,
while theorists are rediscovering the “vast laboratory of history". 33 But
we are not satisfied. A common agenda will be needed for the future.
To quote the President of the International Committee of History of
International Relations, Brunello Vigezzi, history and theory need to
walk side-by-side if a new path in international relations is to be
achieved. The most recent dialogue between social constructivism and
the renewed history of international relations is certainly a good middle
way and permit that many of us to walk together.


The third and final concluding remark deals with Hurrell's view
that political regimes are not solely a function of the domestic sphere,
but are themselves a function of the international arena and the
transnational whole within which all states and societies are embedded.
Similar proposition was also suggested by Cervo's evaluation of Brazil's
foreign policy and Döpcke's study on South Africa, though in a more
intuitive way of reasoning, with less theoretical elaboration.


This seems to be a fruitful hypothesis, which could be developed
through future empirical studies. But as Hurrell has clearly recognized:


It is not difficult, then, to show just how important the
external is for understanding the character of domestic politics,
including the character of states that see their own identity very
much in particularistic or exceptionalist terms. (....) The challenge,
then, is to reincorporate the interpenetration of external and
internal but without repeating the overly deterministic or overly
functionalist accounts of the past. 34


33 Frank, Robert, "Political Regimes and Foreign Policies: Attitudes Towards War and
Peace", chapter 3 of this book.


34 Hurrell, Andrew, op. cit.


27


2


POLITICAL REGIMES AND FOREIGN POLICIES:
AN INTRODUCTION


Andrew Hurrell


This introductory chapter is divided into four sections. The first
analyses the place of political regimes within the context of theories of
international relations. The second considers the question of how
'political regimes' and  foreign policy have been, or might be, defined.
The third surveys some of the main ways in which particular regime
types have been linked to foreign policy, giving primary emphasis to
the literature on democratic and democratizing regimes. The fourth
and final section analyses the extent to which political regimes are not
solely a function of the domestic sphere but are themselves a function
of the international and transnational whole within which all states
and societies are embedded.


I. INTRODUCTION: THE PLACE OF POLITICAL REGIMES IN THE STUDY
OF FOREIGN POLICY


Debates about the relationship between regime type and foreign
policy are, of course, hardly new. But the form that they have taken
depends on the type of approach that is being adopted and the purpose
of the enquiry. Many theoretical approaches to International Relations
close off the analysis of political regimes entirely. They do this
deliberately, not necessarily because they believe that political regimes
are unimportant; but rather because they are not directly interested in
explaining foreign policy at all – and certainly not the foreign policies
of particular states at particular times. This is true of Waltzian neorealism,
Wendtian constructivism, and Keohane's liberal institutionalism.¹ All


1 Alexander Wendt, Social Theory of International Politics Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1999. He states that: '[L]ike Waltz, I am interested in international politics, not


29


ANDREW HURRELL


of these theories make certain assumptions about states and the interests
and preferences of states in order to generate theories of how groups
of states interact cooperatively or conflictually or about the nature and
dynamics of the international system as a whole. All stress that they
are interested primarily in the outcome of state interactions, not in
explaining the behaviour and motivations of individual states. This
distinction between a theory of international politics and a theory of
foreign policy has become quite well established, and it remains
important. It would be inappropriate to take, say, Wendt's version of
constructvism and, in the form that Wendt deploys it, expect it to
yield great insight into many specific problems of foreign policy analysis.


But it is also a problematic and limited distinction. On the one
hand, it is doubtful that any theory of international politics can avoid
foreign policy in quite this clear-cut way.³ After all, what sort of theory
of international relations is it that can tell us nothing about the evolving
international behaviour of even very dominant states over even very
long periods of time? The point is not that a theory of international
relations should be able to make point predictions (what state A will
do at point Y?), but rather that it could reasonably be expected to
explain (or at least be consistent with) broad trends in the foreign
policy of what one might call  system-defining states . On the other
hand, foreign policy analysis is unavoidably about interactions and
relationships. A theory of foreign policy might explain why a state


foreign policy', p.11; and he recognizes that '[T]heir foreign policies are often determined
primarily by domestic politics', p. 2. Kenneth Waltz, 'International Politics is not Foreign
Policy', Security Studies 6 (1996); Robert O. Keohane, After Hegemony: Cooperation and
Discord in the World Political Economy.Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1984.


2 See Gideon Rose, 'Neoclassical realism and theories of foreign policy', World Politics 51
(October 1998): 144-172; and Fareed Zakaria, 'Realism and Domestic Politics', International
Security 17, 1 (Summer 1992).


3 As with so much of his work Waltz maintains this rigid distinction between a theory of
international politics and a theory of foreign policy in large part because of his view as to
the nature of theory. On this account, because foreign policy is potentially the subject of
such a wide range of internal and external factors, all we can aim for are 'analyses' or
'accounts' not proper theory. See Waltz, 'International Politics is not Foreign Policy',
p. 54-55, and discussion in Rose, 'Neoclassical realism', p. 144-146.


30


POLITICAL REGIMES AND FOREIGN POLICIES: AN INTRODUCTION


attempted to do x or y at a given point in time; but the evolution of
its policy (and any evaluation of its success) depends on the nature of
its external environment and the responses of others. Foreign policy
outcomes, then, cannot be understood in terms of the attributes and
preferences of a single country, but only by examining the interaction
of states within an evolving international context.


In contrast, there are other self-styled theories of international
politics that do see the domestic arena as central to the generation of a
theory of international politics. This is true, for example, of Moravcsik's
liberal theory which rests on three core assumptions:


The first assumption is that that the fundamental actors in
international politics are rational individuals and private groups
who organize and exchange to promote their interests. Liberal
theory rests on a  bottom-up' view of politics, in which the
demands of individuals and societal groups are treated as
exogenous causes of the interests underlying state behaviour.
...The second assumption of liberal theory is that states (or other
political institutions) represent some subset of domestic society,
whose weighted preferences constitute the underlying goals ('state
preferences') that rational state officials pursue via foreign policy.
Representative institutions thereby constitute a critical 'transmission
belt' by which the preferences and social power of individuals
and groups in civil society enter the political realm and are
eventually translated into state policy. The third core assumption
of liberal theory is that the configuration of state preferences
shapes state behaviour in the international system.... Each state
seeks to realize its distinct preferences under constraints imposed
by the preferences of other states. 4


I have quoted this at some length because, in common with a
long tradition of liberal thinking, domestic politics clearly matter a
good deal. But, in contrast with many others writing within the liberal


4 Andrew Moravcsik, 'Liberal International Relations Theory: A Scientific Assessment' In:
Colin Elman and Miriam Fendius Elman eds., Progress in International Relations Theory,
Cambridge MA: MIT Press, 2002).


31


ANDREW HURRELL


tradition, regime type per se is not critical. Moravcsik defines his liberal
theory as one that can co-opt or include any actual process of domestic
preference formation or aggregation, whether or not this has a
specifically 'liberal character. He begins with a traditional-looking
liberal emphasis on state-society relations and on the state as an arena
for pluralist politics rather than as an actor. He does this precisely so
that he can try to ‘take preferences seriously . But, in order to make his
approach work across many kinds of societies, including many illiberal
regimes, he has to include all sorts of ‘transmission belts' many of
which have nothing to do with the traditional liberal emphasis on
pluralism. Hence the state is viewed as a representative institution even
if it represents only people who have captured the state and have few
or no links with the broader society.


But whilst it is true that the distinction between international
politics and foreign policy matters, it is also true that many broad
theoretical ideas in International Relations have been used as a basis
for analysing the foreign policies of individual states or of groups of
states. Thus those influenced by realism will always tend to downplay
the importance of regime type and will emphasize the extent to which
states are pushed and shoved by the constraints and opportunities of
the international political system to behave in particular ways. For all
strands of realism, the imperatives of seeking security in a self-help world
forces all states, good or bad, democratic or authoritarian, to seek to preserve
their security and follow the logic of balance of power politics. Even if
they seek to escape, the system will socialize them by creating incentives
that reward certain kinds of power political behaviour, and by punishing
deviance. From this it also follows that the practice of foreign policy is
about locating and implementing a more or less objective national interest
that is derived primarily from the constraints and opportunities presented
by the international system, not from the vagaries and vacillations of
domestic politics. 5 There is nothing unique to International Relations


5 Within Latin American writing, this idea can be linked to the concept of 'política de
estado', defined by Rosendo Fraga as those policies 'shared by all the relevant political
parties in one country; and consequently whose execution does not depend on the changes
that elections might have on governments'.


32


POLITICAL REGIMES AND FOREIGN POLICIES: AN INTRODUCTION


about this view of states and foreign policy. It draws directly on a long
tradition of historical work emphasizing  den Primat der Aussenpolitik'.


Most of those concerned with the foreign policies of particular
states have quickly concluded that systemic forces alone are not enough
to provide an adequate explanatory picture and include various unit-
level factors. Of course, those who wish to see themselves as working
within a realist tradition will always tend to start with the view that it
is the distribution of power in the international political system that
sets the basic parameters of foreign policy.  A good theory of foreign
policy should ask first what effect the international system has on
national behaviour, because the most powerful generalizable
characteristic of a state in international relations is its relative position
in the international system.’6 But it is noticeable, first, just how quickly
realist analyses of foreign policy move to bring in various unit-level or
domestic variables; and, second, just how deep are the divergences
between different strands of realism (offensive realism, defensive
realism, neoclassical realism) over which domestic factors are to be
included (state strength; perceptions, domestic economic interest
groups); and over how far incorporating them means that moving out
of the realist camp. Thus, for example, Zakaria's  state-centred realism'
considers the relative capability of the government vis-à-vis society in
his attempt to explain the US rise to world power, but still considers
this (rather unconvincingly) to be a realist approach.7


It is, therefore, precisely the weaknesses of systemic accounts
that press towards the analysis of domestic factors in general and towards
thinking about the character of different regime types in particular.
This is the case not least because many of the apparently straightforward
categories of conventional realist international relations analysis turn
out to be anything other than straightforward. It may be true that all
states and all political actors seek power and promote their self-interest.


6 Zakaria, Realism and Domestic Politics, p. 197.


7 Fareed Zakaria, From Wealth to Power: The Unusual Origins of America's World Role.
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1998. On the problem of smuggling in so many
unit-level factors that realism's distinctiveness is vitiated, see Jeffrey Legro and Andrew
Moravcsik, 'Is anybody still a realist?', International Security, 24, 2 (Fall 1999): 5-55.


33


ANDREW HURRELL


But the crucial question is always: what sorts of power and in pursuit of
what kinds of self-interest?


The utter unobviousness of ‘security in the context of US-Latin
American relations during the Cold War provides a good example.
Security was most often about indirect security challenges resulting from
political, social or economic instability in Latin America. US policymakers
had long feared that such instability would bring to power radical nationalist
anti-American governments or would create conflicts and crises that could
be exploited by Washington's enemies. Fear of political or revolutionary
instability predated the Cold War, but the ideological and power political
struggle with Moscow heightened the salience of such threats. As the Cold
War became an increasingly global conflict after the Korean War and as
competition and conflict shifted increasingly from Europe to the
developing world, so the perceived importance of such conflicts for the
global balance of power grew and the logic of ‘falling dominoes' and alliance
credibility became increasingly prevalent: If the U.S did not respond to
challenges even in areas that were intrinsically or objectively ‘unimportant ,
then this would reflect badly on more central alliance relations and would
lead the other side to step up the pressure. Thus the logic of rivalry magnified
many intrinsically minor conflicts, increased the threat from political
instability, and made the Third World  matter in new ways that were
hard both to define and to limit.


It is certainly the case that, as Lars Schoultz puts it, ‘[I]f one wants
to understand the core of United States policy toward Latin America, one
studies security'. But the meaning of even such apparently powerful


8 The myth of an objective national interest derived from the competitive logic of the
international political system has been the subject of sustained critique for many years. But
these are also the questions that have driven much recent constructivist research on norms,
culture and identity. See, in particular, Peter J. Katzenstein, Introduction. In: Peter J.
Katzenstein ed., The Culture of National Security. New York: Columbia, 1996. Note, however,
that there is a great deal of ambiguity within constructivism over whether the identities that
underpin state preferences are the result of social interaction (as on the Wendtian account),
or solely the product of largely autonomous national histories and processes of state
formation.


9 Lars Schoultz, National Security and United States Policy towards Latin America, Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1987, p. xi.


34


POLITICAL REGIMES AND FOREIGN POLICIES: AN INTRODUCTION


imperative as national security was deeply contested and by no means
straightforward. Hence there were very great divisions amongst
policymakers and public opinion on whether this instability might come
to constitute a security threat. ‘Specifically, there is no agreement on what
might cause threatening instability in Latin America, nor is there agreement
on what the actual consequences of instability might be'. Conservatives at
one end argued that, even if not actually caused by communism, instability
was stirred by local communists aided and abetted by the Soviet Union
and its allies. The appropriate response was therefore military intervention
to crush 'subversion and to discourage Soviet interventionism. Liberals
argued that only by tackling the underlying social causes of instability
could US long-term security be guaranteed. The answer was therefore in
economic development, promoting democracy, and engaging in nation
building. Partly, then, because of sheer complexity of understanding the
nature and significance of instability, partly because of the vagueness of
Cold War arguments about credibility, and partly because of the broader
loss of consensus that followed the Vietnam War, the evolution of US
security interests in Latin America has to be explained by reference to
processes internal to the US. And this remains as true today in relation to
the study of the so-called ‘war on terrorism as it was in the days of the
'struggle against communism . More generally, as Robert Frank's chapter
argues strongly, democracies (and most importantly the United States,
including across republican and democratic administrations) have tended
to view their national interest as being very closely bound up with
democracy and democratic values.


So, if we are pushed towards domestic factors by the weaknesses
or limits of one category of systemic theory, the same is true of other
systemic approaches, neo-marxism and dependency theory most
obviously. As with neorealism, dependency theory is systemic. It seeks to
account for the behaviour of the units on the basis of the attributes of the
system as a whole. But the nature and dynamic of the structure is completely
different. Instead of a logic based on power competition in an anarchical
state system, the focus of dependency theory is on the dynamics of the
world capitalist system and on the economic needs and pressures of the
major capitalist state. Moreover, in addition to states, great weight is given


35


ANDREW HURRELL


to the role of economic non-state actors such as transnational companies,
international banks and international economic institutions and also to
the complex relationship between states and classes.


Dependency theory arose principally as an attempt by Latin
American scholars to understand the nature of the region's political and
economic underdevelopment. It became of increasing interest to
International Relations because of the critical influence that the international
system as believed to have on development, and because the approach
implied a permanent pattern of dominance and dependence between core
industrialized states and the underdeveloped periphery. Yet one of the
difficulties of evaluating dependency approaches (and indeed one of the
major criticisms) is that a theory of underdevelopment is certainly not the
same as a theory of foreign policy or international relations.


As theory of underdevelopment, dependency theory was subjected
to a barrage of criticisms: that it had underestimated the growth potential
of peripheral capitalism (as evidenced by the emergence of East Asian
economies); that it overestimated the importance of the external factors
and ignored the fact that many of the most powerful obstacles to
development lay in the domestic system and in the history of individual
states and societies; that it placed too much emphasis on the role of foreign
direct investment, downplaying the importance of the international trading
and financial system; and that there is no necessary link (or even ‘elective
affinity') between dependence in the international economy and non-
democratic or authoritarian political systems. As a theory of international
relations, two classical criticisms stood out: first that its economistic bias
blinded dependency theorists to the powerful logic of inter-state
competition. Thus, for example, the constraints facing weak states in
Central America resulted far more directly and powerfully from the Cold
War driven imperatives for the U.S. to police its sphere of influence than
from the dynamics of global capitalism. Interventionism, both before,
during and after the Cold War, was about geopolitics and security, not
about capitalism and exploitation. Second, that the strong structuralism
of dependency theory was simply unable to account for the foreign policy
differences across different  dependent states or, just as often, across the
foreign policy of the same state at different times. Such differences can


36


POLITICAL REGIMES AND FOREIGN POLICIES: AN INTRODUCTION


often only be explained by incorporating unit-level factors. It was never
possible to simply ‘read off either the foreign policy preferences of Latin
American elites or the actual course of foreign policy from some supposed
logic of peripheral capitalism.


There are at least two legacies of dependency theory that have had a
continuing influence on the analysis of Latin American foreign policies
since the end of the Cold War. The first is the tendency to see foreign
policy choices, and especially the move towards a ‘neo-liberal foreign policy
in such countries as Mexico or Argentina, as simply imposed by the
hegemonic or neo-imperial power. Of course hegemonic imposition might
be one way of understanding foreign policy change; of course, US
hegemony does represent a major external constraint on foreign policy
choices; and, of course, the external environment has been highly
constraining across many different dimensions. But the model of
hegemonic imposition is, certainly in the cases of major Latin American
states, simply empirically wrong. The dramatic changes that took place in
the foreign policies of Mexico and Argentina In the 1990s, as well as the
less dramatic changes in the foreign policy of Brazil, reflected national
choices and the evaluation of different national strategies of international
insertion – albeit within a constraining international system.


The second, and more important, legacy is to overemphasize the
relationship between economic model and foreign policy. Of course, the
choice of economic model is a critical, indeed fundamental, factor. No
one could explain the foreign policy of, say, Brazil from 1930 onwards
without linking that explanation to the growth of ISI and of national
developmentalism. But foreign policy cannot be reduced simply to the
outward expression of a given development model. In the first place, again
as well illustrated by the case of Brazil, the ideology of foreign policy
might contain values and goals (the drive for autonomy and greater
international influence or the protection of national sovereignty) that were
certainly closely related to a particular model, but which have come to
have a life of their own and which have survived the move away from that
model. Second, 'neo-liberalism is not one thing but many (just as was
ISI), and the differences in the trajectory of national economic policy
remain considerable through the 1990s. And third, even if there was a


37


ANDREW HURRELL


general move towards neo-liberalism in the 1990s, this did not, again as a
matter of historical record, translate into a single pattern of foreign policy
either in terms of preferences or outcomes. Thus both Mexico and
Argentina did move towards a closer relationship with the United States,
but with highly significant differences. Thus, in the Mexican case, there
was a conscious policy of segmentation – i.e. institutionalizing deep
economic integration, but seeking to maintain distance of non-economic
issues; whereas in Argentina the Menem strategy was built around the idea
of close linkage between the political and economic – in the hope that
very close political alignment with Washington would bring economic
benefits. Equally, even if Brazil did move economically in a neo-liberal
direction, this did not bring either the desire for close alignment with the
US or the actual development of improved relations. Relations remained
distant and marked by both divergent views of the international system
and a persistent sense of frustration.


So we clear the ground for looking at the importance of
domestic factors by looking at the weaknesses and limits of systemic
or  outside-in explanations of foreign policy behaviour. Yet  political
regime' is only one of many potentially important ways of thinking
about the role domestic factors. On the one hand, we may wish to
examine the impact of differences amongst similar ‘regime types'. Thus
Risse-Kappen has sought to show how differences in political
institutions, policy networks, and societal structures account for variance
in the foreign policy of democratic states during the Cold War. 10 On
the other hand, the domestic factors that really matter may have nothing
to do with regime type at all. Thus we might consider, amongst many
other factors, domestic political and economic ideologies, political
institutions and party politics, socio-economic interests and interest-
group politics, the strength of the state, and the character of state-
society relations. Foreign policy analysis has sometimes degenerated
into the production of ever more complex typologies that lay out
every conceivable category of domestic variable as in the work of


10 Thomas Risse-Kappen, 'Public Opinion, Domestic Structure, and Foreign Policy in
Liberal Democracies', World Politics, 43, July 1991: 479-512.


38


POLITICAL REGIMES AND FOREIGN POLICIES: AN INTRODUCTION


Rosenau or Brecher during the 1960s and early 1970s. These can serve
as useful check-lists, but not much more.


More useful has been the clustering of factors as between systemic
explanations, society-centred explanations, and state-centred
approaches. 11 Why more useful? The first reason is that this clustering
helps us to fill the analytical space between Waltz's narrow view of
explanatory theory on the one hand and mere ‘accounts' on the other.
Much of the work that has driven debate and provoked further analysis,
whether within History or Political Science, has sought to claim that
one or other of these clusters has, actually, been dominant in the foreign
policy of a particular country. Think, for example, of the challenge to
orthodox, externalist, power-political accounts of the origins of the
First World War posed by social imperialist and other innenpolitische
factors and forces. Second, because each of these clusters relate to broader
sets of theories that give rise to expected patterns of behaviour. If foreign
policy is really driven by x, what observable outcomes would we expect
to see? What would be hard or otherwise instructive cases that would
enable us to decide whether this pattern of explanation holds? And
third, because each of these clusters has generated, or can be related to,
particular methodologies (for example, organizational process,
bureaucratic politics, cognitive or psychological approaches, discursive
approaches. 12


In a sense, this is all very obvious. But it is important to recognize
the existence of a wide range of such domestic factors. We might, for
example, see great continuity in the foreign policy of a country across
changes of regime and therefore conclude that domestic factors are
relatively unimportant. Brazil since 1930 might be just such a case.


11 For one of the clearest see G. John Ikenberry, David A Lake, and Michael Mastanduno,
'Introduction: approaches to explaining American foreign economic policy', International
Organization 42, 1, Winter 1998: 1-14. In broad terms, and certainly in relation to the
United States, it is societal and interest group pressures that have attracted most analytical
attention, especially in explaining foreign economic policy. See, for example, Helen Milner,
Interests, Institutions, and Information: Domestic Politics and International Relations. Pinceton:
Princeton U.P., 1997.


12 See Christopher Hill, The Changing Politics of Foreign Policy. London: Macmillan, 2003,
chapter 6 'The Domestic Sources of Foreign Policy'.


39


ANDREW HURRELL


The broad continuity of foreign policy across military and civilian
regimes and across different types of civilian regimes is indeed striking.
But it would, at least on my own view, be mistaken to argue that
external imperatives and structural constraints, whether from the
international political system or from global capitalism, can do all, or
indeed most, of the explanatory work. An alternative would be to
explain continuity in terms of the persistence of a certain set of
understandings of how actors interpret the world and how their
understandings of 'where they belong are formed and institutionally
embedded.


All foreign relations are understood through the prism of history
and through the mutual images that have been created and reinforced over
time, and then institutionalized within dominant foreign policy ideologies.
Without trying to make everything fit within a single mould, it is possible
to identify an orthodox framework for understanding the history of Brazil's
place in the world that unites many foreign policymakers and many
historians and analysts. It is focused around the ideology of national
autonomy and development. It takes the project of national
developmentalism as its central organizing idea. It lays great emphasis on
the period from 1930 and, more particularly, from 1945 by which time
the economic foundations of the project appear more clearly and are more
firmly embedded in economic policy. It places great emphasis on external
structures – both the capitalist world economy which contains far more
snares and constraints than opportunities, and the international political
system in which the hegemony of the U.S. is viewed as a natural obstacle
to the achievement of Brazilian development and to its upward mobility
in the international power hierarchy. Perhaps above all, this way of thinking
takes utterly for granted the intrinsic value of national autonomy, of
defending economic and political sovereignty, and of developing a more
prominent international role for the country. Clearly this set of ideas is
closely related to the development model of the ISI period and to the
autonomy and development focused foreign policy that was most visible
and influential in the 1970s. But, as noted above, it cannot be reduced to
a particular version of national-developmentalism. It has continued to
influence many of the unspoken assumptions that characterize Brazilian


40


POLITICAL REGIMES AND FOREIGN POLICIES: AN INTRODUCTION


debates on both globalization and U.S. hegemony. Theoretically it draws
both on traditional power-political realism (the world as a mean and
anarchical place) and on dependency theory and Marxism. Machiavelli
and Marx are to be found in constant, if not always very consistent,
conversation. And, partially in consequence, it draws together both right
and left. This was true in the past (remember just how briefly Brazilian
foreign policy was dominated by anti-communism even under military
governments, and how much substantive overlap there was between
military nationalists and dependistas).


I have taken the Brazilian case. But we could multiply the examples
of where it is well-established and well-institutionalized patterns of ideas
and the way in which they interpret the constraints, imperatives and
opportunities of the international system that explain the continuity of
foreign policy across regimes –rather than the allegedly objective imperatives
themselves. The chapter on the United States in this volume seeks to
explain the continuity of foreign policy in terms of ideas, ideology and the
construction of a particular set of national myths: ‘ideologies are the
collective myths around which a nation understands itself and differentiates
itself from others'. But we could also consider Nehruvian conceptions of
India's place in the world; British understandings of its relationship to
Europe; Gaullism in France; middle-powermanship and Canadian foreign
policy.


A final point needs to be made in this opening section and that
concerns the crucial distinction between analysing and explaining
foreign policy behaviour on the one hand, and evaluating its success
on the other. Much writing on, for example, Latin American foreign
policies since the end of the Cold War slips unsteadily from one task
to the other. This is especially true in cases such as Argentina where the
deep ideological and historic conflicts over the country's foreign policy
are reflected in the academic analysis of foreign policy, which has itself
become ideologized and is often highly normative. 13 There is also an


13 Compare, for example, the chapter by Rapoport and Spiguel in this volume with Carlos
Escude's Realismo Perifico: Fundamentos para la Nueva Politica Exterior Argentina. Buenos
Aires: Planeta, 1992.


41


ANDREW HURRELL


extensive literature on how regime type impacts on the success or
coherence of foreign policy. 14 A good illustration of this kind of work
can be seen in the tradition of writers (especially amongst conservatives
and realists during the Cold War) who claimed that democratic western
states were at a disadvantage when facing authoritarian regimes and
were bound to be less successful over the long-run. I am not considering
this work here, not least because it has failed to produce any great
insights. One of the classic examples of this kind of work is Waltz's
second book, Foreign Policy and Democratic Politics.15 Waltz's
comparison between the US and Britain illustrates the difficulty of
trying to link regime type to success. Perhaps more convincingly, he
does counter the claim (common amongst conservatives and realists
during the Cold War) that democratic western states were at a
disadvantage when facing authoritarian regimes. As he explains, 'Four
major considerations, then, bring into question the assertion that in
foreign policy authoritarian governments have a natural advantage.
First, authoritarian rulers tend to blind themselves and stultify their
successors development. Second, authoritarian governments are no
more immune to the politics of interests and their pressures upon
policy than are democracies. Third, rulers and would-be rulers in both
types of state must worry about the relation of the policies they espouse
to their own political fortunes. Finally, both authoritarian rulers and
democratic politicians must confront the dilemmas of control and
security and must decide whether to strive for more of the one at the
expected expense of the other. . .  In a world where military technology
places a premium upon speed and opponents at times appear to be
implacable, the flexibility, dispatch, coherence, and ruthlessness of
authoritarian states have been thought to be decisive advantages.


14 Prominent supporters of the idea that democracy is problematic for running a good
foreign policy include Adam Ulam, George Kennan and, of course, Henry Kissinger. There
is a separate set of debates, which I also do not consider here, concerning the claim that
democracies are more successful in fighting and winning the wars that they enter. See
Michael C. Desch, 'Democracy and Victory: Why Regime Type Hardly Matters', International
Security 27, 2. Fall 2002, p. 5-47.


15 Kenneth Waltz, Foreign Policy and Democratic Politics, London: Longmans, 1968.


42


POLITICAL REGIMES AND FOREIGN POLICIES: AN INTRODUCTION


...Coherent policy, executed with a nice combination of caution and
verve, is difficult to achieve in any political system, but no more so for
democratic states than for others'. 16


II. DEFINITIONS


Neither term in the title of this volume is straightforward and
part of the analysis necessarily has to involve definitions. Let us start
with the concept of regime.


There is a good deal of commonality amongst the most cited
definitions of political regime, above all in terms of their emphasis on
the formal and informal rules that govern the interaction of major
actors in the political system. Obviously the character of these rules
that help us classify a regime as democratic, fascist, authoritarian etc.
But, within almost all types of regime, the specific character of rules
will also shape the conduct of foreign policy: who can make foreign
policy, with which instruments, and in which ways. This narrow view
can be seen in the following:


1. [By regime or political regime] ‘we mean the ensemble of
patterns, explicit or not, that determines the forms and channels of
access to principal government positions, the characteristics of the actors
who are admitted and excluded from such access, and the resources or
strategies that they can use to gain access. This necessarily involves
institutionalisation, i.e., to be relevant the patterns defining a given
regime must be habitually known, practiced, and accepted, at least by
those which these same patterns define as participants in the process.
Where a regime effectively exists, real or potential dissents are unlikely
to threaten these patterns, owing to their weak organization, lack of
organization, manipulated depoliticization, or outright repression. '17


16 Waltz, Foreign Policy and Democratic Politics, p. 311.


17 Guillermo O'Donnell and Philippe Schmitter, Transition from Authoritarian Rule: Tentative
Conclusions about Uncertain Democracies, Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press,
1986,  . 73.


43


ANDREW HURRELL


2. [A regime consists of the] ‘the formal and informal structure
of state and governmental roles and processes. The regime includes
the method of selection of the government and the representative
assemblies (election, coup, decision within the military, etc.), formal
and informal mechanisms of representation, and patterns of repression.
The regime is typically distinguished from the particular incumbents
who occupy state and governmental roles, the political coalition that
supports these incumbents, and the public policies they adopt (except
of course policies that define or transform the regime itself). 18


3. ‘It is essential to distinguish between the concept of political
regime and the concept of the state. By “regime” I mean the formal
rules that link the main political institutions (legislature to the executive,
executive to the judiciary, and party system to them all), as well as the
issue of the political nature of the ties between citizens and rulers
(democratic, oligarchic, totalitarian, or whatever). The conceptualisation
of the state is a complex matter, but there does exist a certain degree of
agreement that at the highest level of abstraction the notion of state
refers to the basic alliance, the basic “pact of domination , that exists
among social classes or fractions of dominant classes and the norms
which guarantee their dominance over the subordinate strata. '19


However, whilst these definitions insist that we stay narrowly
focused on political rules and institutions, others press a in broader
direction, especially in wanting to include the relationship between a
particular regime and the broader social order and the form of political
or class coalition on which the state rests. Consider the following:


4. 'On the one hand, the state expresses the domination of a
given combination of classes and fractions of classes on the rest of


18 Ruth Berins Collier and Paul Collier, Shaping the Political Arena: Critical Junctures, the
Labor Movement, and Regime Dynamics in Latin America, Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 1991, p. 789.


19 Fernando H. Cardoso, On the Characterization of Authoritarian Regimes in Latin
America. In: David Collier (ed.), The New Authoritarianism in Latin America, Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1979,  . 38.


44


POLITICAL REGIMES AND FOREIGN POLICIES: AN INTRODUCTION


society... On the other hand, the state is a set of institutions and
personnels through which class domination.   is expressed... The state
in its institutional sense is often referred to as the "regime”, thereby
emphasizing the formal structures of political authority – parliament,
executive, judiciary – but including also the mechanisms of mediation
between those structures and the citizens, notably the party system...
Forms of regime include all the variants of democratic arrangements
(constitutional monarchy, republic, presidentialism, parliamentary
system, two-party, multi-party, etc.) as well as politically exclusionary
regimes: authoritarian, corporatist, fascist, etc.'20


5. 'Regimes represent a particular social order [and involve] a
sustained fusion between the institutions of the state and particular
segments of the socio-economic order.   In short, a regime's character
will be determined by the societal coalition on which a state rests, the
formal powers of that state, and by the institutionalisation and bias of
the public policies that result.’21


6. [A political regime consists of the] ‘institutional mediators
between the State and society that resolve the problem of how society
is governed, of the relationship between the people [la gente] and the
State, of the forms of representation and participation, and of the
channelling of conflicts and demands.'22


How much concern with the character of state-society relations
or with the links between regime and state remain therefore contested
issues. 23 But they do matter and in important ways. For example, the


20 Christian Anglade and Carlos Fortin, The State and Capital Accumulation in Latin
America: A Conceptual and Historical Introduction. In: Anglade and Fortin (ed.), The State
and Capital Accumulation in Latin America, Pittsburg: University of Pittsburg Press, 1985, р.
16 and 19.


21 T.J. Pempel, Restructuring Social Coalitions: State, Society, and Regime. In: Rolf Torstendahl
(ed.), State Theory and State History, Newbury Park: Sage Publications, 1992, p.120.
22 Manuel Antonio Garreton, Hacia una nueva era politica: Estudio sobre democratizaciones,
Mexico: Fondo de Cultura Economica, 1995), p.185-186.


23 For example the chapter by Rapoport and Spiguel in this volume argues that explaining
the erratic character of Argentinian foreign policy must look beyond the shifts between
democratic and authoritarian regimes and instead focus on the deep socio-political conflicts
that have existed both between state and society and within the state.


45


ANDREW HURRELL


foreign policy impact of an economic model is likely to be far more
closely connected to the character of the state, rather than the regime,
and to the supporting set of state-society relations. As already discussed,
ISI was very important in shaping the foreign policies of Latin
American states. But it was not closely or in any way necessarily
connected to a particular regime type. In fact it flourished across many
different types of regime. Indeed it is clear that several of the chapters
in this volume place a great deal of explanatory weight on the impact
on foreign policy of the dominant model of economic development.


What of 'foreign policy'? In much of the literature on the links
between regime type and foreign policy, there has been a concentration
on one particular type of foreign policy behaviour, namely war or
resort to force. Within Political Science it is this linkage that has been
most extensively debated and analysed, as we shall see below. At the
other extreme we find definitions of foreign policy that cover all forms
of interaction between one society and all aspects of its international
environment. The common use within Latin America of the term
‘international insertion captures this very broad idea. Between these,
one finds various attempts to define foreign policy, for example:
'[F]oreign policies consist of those actions which, expressed in the
form of explicitly stated goals, commitments and/or directives, and
pursued by governmental representatives acting on behalf of their
sovereign communities, are directed toward objectives, conditions and
actors – both governmental and non-governmental – which they want
to affect and which lie beyond their territorial legitimacy'. 24


I am not sure that there is much that can be settled by definitional
fiat or by refining definitions; but it must surely matter which particular
aspect of foreign policy one is trying to explain in considering the
possible relationship with regime type. What might hold in terms of
the relationship between regime type and propensity to go to war,
might be irrelevant in considering the relationship between regime
type and, say, policy towards international institutions.


24 Walter Carlsnaes, Foreign Policy, In: Walter Carlsnaes, Thomas Risse and Beth A Simmons
eds., Handbook of International Relations, London: Sage, 2002: 335.


46


POLITICAL REGIMES AND FOREIGN POLICIES: AN INTRODUCTION


III. REGIME TYPE AND FOREIGN POLICY


MILITARY AND AUTHORITARIAN REGIMES


There are obviously many studies of the foreign policies of
military and authoritarian regimes. It is also obviously the case that
the move to or from authoritarian rule is an important variable in
explaining the foreign policy of many individual countries, including
some (but definitely not all) in South America. But I am not sure that
we can identify clear patterns of foreign policy behaviour that hold
across such regimes in any generalizable sense. There is, of course, a
persistent, usually ideologically driven, tendency to view authoritarian
and still more totalitarian regimes as being naturally expansionist or
aggressive - a danger both to their own people and to their neighbours.
This was true of many western views of the Soviet Union and continues
to be reflected in views of deviant or rogue states that resist the obvious
logic of the democratic, peaceful west. Even though such views are
mistaken, they still matter politically. In particular, they encourage
both liberal and conservative crusading (promoting regime change,
making the world safe for democracy etc), especially in the United
States. Indeed such beliefs form an important element of the foreign
policy ideology of the United States. 25


It is also the case that certain foreign policy tendencies are often
associated with such regimes, for example the use of an adventurist or
assertive foreign policy as part of a strategy of domestic legitimation
or to bolster flagging domestic support. The ‘Flucht nach vorne' of a
Nazi regime that had embedded foreign policy expansionism as central
to its legitimizing ideology and whose domestic weakness intensified
that expansionism provides one example. The adventurism of
Argentina's military regime in invading the Malvinas/Falklands in 1982
is another often cited example.


25 Michael N. Hunt, Ideology and U.S. Foreign Policy, New York: Yale University Press,
1987, and, written within the ideological envelope, Tony Smith, America's Mission. The
United States and the Worldwide Struggle for Democracy in the Twentieth Century, Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1994.


47


ANDREW HURRELL


And yet many authoritarian regimes have been very inward-
looking and unadventurous. Franco's Spain is a good example. Chinese
foreign policy has been characterized overt time as much by caution as
by adventurism. Equally many military governments have been very
uninterested in spending money on their militaries and still less
interested in using what military power they possessed for the purpose
of foreign policy activism. Such was often the case in Latin America in
the 1960s and 1970s. Indeed the gap between the rhetoric of the
Brazilian post-1964 military government and its actions provides a
particularly interesting example. Even under a military government
influenced by extravagant and often absurd quite geopolitical notions,
Brazil did not play the power-political game in the way that either the
rhetoric of its leaders or realist theory would lead us to expect. There were
many occasions when power resources have not been developed or exploited
and a persistent tendency to downplay hard, especially militarized, power-
projection. There was often a significant gap between recurring intimations
of influence and the low-key, risk-averse and sometimes diffident policies
followed in practice, as well as by the generally low-priority accorded to
foreign policy. Brazil has been neither an unconditional status quo power,
nor a deeply revisionist state. It has no really serious grievances, but nor is
it completely satisfied. Many of its goals are defensive and continue to
reflect its economic interests and its continued economic vulnerability.
Others involve a more direct effort to increase its international influence.
Thus, although power has mattered for Brazilian policymakers and
continues to do so, a simple power-maximization model does not fit the
Brazilian case. But this pattern did not change in any particularly significant
way during the years of authoritarian and military government.


Finally, even in cases of authoritarian collapse or decay, there is no
clear imperative towards conflict or external assertion. The collapse of the
USSR provides a clear example, whether this was due to the constraints
imposed by the military and nuclear balance with the US or to the particular
character of the reformist project that Gorbachev sought to implement.
This is not to suggest that domestic failure may not be crucial in explaining
foreign policy change. It remains the case that it was the perception (and
reality) of failure and falling-behind that pressed Gorbachev towards


48


POLITICAL REGIMES AND FOREIGN POLICIES: AN INTRODUCTION


reformism and, by extension, towards a dramatic re-evaluation of the
country's foreign policy. In the case of Mexico, the crucial break in foreign
policy came in the mid-1980s rather than at the point of regime change
with Fox's victory in 2001. But the impact of economic crisis within the
context of the PRI's steady loss of legitimacy was crucial in pressing the
historic shift towards integration and alignment with the United States.


REVOLUTIONARY REGIMES


Revolutionary regimes have often been seen as a crucial test of
the issues involved in this debate. Revolutionary regimes are, after all,
usually distinctive in their ambitions for both domestic change and
for the transformation of their external environment, or even of the
international system as a whole. Indeed it is the proclaimed universality
of many revolutionary claims that is most important and most
disruptive. In clear Burkean mould, classical realists such as Kissinger
or Wight viewed revolutionary regimes as inherently threatening to
established patterns of international legitimacy: 'But when one or more
states claim universal applicability for their particular [domestic]
structure, schisms grow deep indeed. In that event, the domestic
structure becomes not only an obstacle to understanding but one of
the principal issues in international affairs. ’26 Alongside mass democratic
politics, it is the rise of social revolution that undermines the conservative
utopia of classic balance of power diplomacy. And, of course, it is the
perceived danger or social revolution that has come to play a particular
role in the foreign policy ideology of the United States. 27


But, on the other side, realists and neorealists often emphasize
the degree to which revolutionary regimes have been 'tamed' or


26 Henry Kissinger, Domestic Structure and Foreign Policy. In: American Foreign Policy 3rd
ed. New York: W.W. Norton, 1977, p. 12. This essay gives Kissinger's views of the foreign
policy tendencies of democratic states (bad for foreign policy), marxist-leninist (accentuating
international tension), and 'new states' (prone to unstable and reckless foreign policies).
More broadly on the challenge of revolution see Jennifer Welsh, Edmund Burke and
International Relations, Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1995.


27 See Hunt, Ideology and US Foreign Policy, chapter 4.


49


ANDREW HURRELL


'socialized' by the system. Whatever the rhetoric of revolution,
revolutionary states have found themselves condemned to follow the
power-driven logics of the international political system, and to exploit
the interest-driven logics of international society. On many accounts,
this provides the most powerful evidence of the importance of the
structural or systemic forces in which realists place so much faith. Clearly
these claims have generated an enormous range of studies of the foreign
policies of particular revolutionary regimes and of the balance between
interest and ideology in those foreign policies. 28 More general studies
have also emphasized that the picture is not so simple. Thus David
Armstrong demonstrates, firstly, that the process by which
revolutionary states are  socialized' by the system is far more multi-
facetted and complex; and, secondly, that, although it may be true, as
realists tell us, that the international system tames and socializes
revolutionary regimes, it is also true that each of the great social revolutions
of the modern era has left an indelible mark on the dominant norms of
international society.29 Fred Halliday has argued that revolutions are
themselves necessarily international events, in cause, ideology and
consequence and stresses the transnational context within which they occur,
both of ideological change and of the development of capitalist
modernity.30 His work is a good example of the difficulties of seeing
'regime type' and  foreign policy as belonging to near, easily separable
boxes (see section IV below).


DEMOCRACY, DEMOCRATIZATION AND FOREIGN POLICY


This is the area where the strongest claims are made about the
links between regime type and at least one kind of foreign policy
behaviour, namely the resort to war. Democratic peace theory rests on


28 For a particularly useful analysis that is of broader relevance, see Steven I. Levine, Perception
and Ideology in Chinese Foreign Policy. In: Thomas W. Robinson and David Shambaugh
eds., Chinese Foreign Policy. Theory and Practice, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1994.
29 This interaction is explored in David Armstrong, Revolutions and World Order; Oxford:
Oxford U.P., 1993.


30 Fred Halliday, Revolution and World Politics. The Rise and Fall of the Sixth Great Power,
London: Macmillan, 1999.


50


POLITICAL REGIMES AND FOREIGN POLICIES: AN INTRODUCTION


two simple claims: (a) that democracies almost never fight each other and
very rarely consider the use of force in their mutual relations; and (b) that
other types of relations are much more conflictual including democracies 
interactions with non-democracies. Note that the claim is almost always
made in more or less probabilistic terms (ie it will not necessarily predict
all foreign policy behaviour; it is not about  point predictions'). Few would
claim that it is a determinstic law. Note too the idea of a separate peace
between democracies. It is not a general theory since it is agnostic or at
least much less certain about relationship between democracies and non-
democracies. Some argue that democracies are as war-prone as non-
democracies in interactions involving the latter. Others argue that, even
here, democracies are more pacific. But for the proponents the main claim
is clear: although democracies are not inherently more peaceful than
authoritarian regime, there does seem secure evidence of a separate
democratic peace. There have been military threats, militarized crises, but
almost no inter-state war. In addition, militarized disputes seem to occur
less frequently than would be expected in a random distribution and almost
never escalate into war. 31


The literature on democratic peace theory is by now very
extensive and I do not propose to review it in any broad or general
way, or to highlight its problems and limits. Instead let me make
three points relevant to the concerns of this volume.


First, the debate on the underlying causal logics behind democratic
peace has tended to move away from an emphasis on democratic
regimes and institutions and towards an emphasis on democratic or
liberal societies. There is quite general agreement that the structural
constraints of democratic institutions and of democratic politics can only
be used with great difficulty to explain the existence of a separate peace
only between democracies. Hence much discussion has revolved around


31 Democratic peace theory has become central, not just to debates in International Relations
theory but also to regional security analysis. Take, for example, Gerald Segal's claim: 'By far
the most important factor for international security seems to be the emergence of pluralist
(democratic) political systems', 'How Insecure is Pacific Asia', International Affairs
73, 2.1997,  . 235. For a good overview of the debate see Brown, Michael, Lynn-Jones,
Sean and Miller, Steven (eds.), Debating the Democratic Peace, Cambridge: MA, 1996.


51


ANDREW HURRELL


so-called normative explanations: not based on the role of democratic
institutions pushing actors towards pacific behaviour by affecting their
instrumental calculus of interest; but rather the process by which democratic
norms work to shape the motivations, perceptions and practices of actors
and the way in which ‘... democracies externalize their domestic political
norms of tolerance and compromise in their foreign relations, thus making
war with others like them unlikely.’32 Democratic politics, so claim the
proponents, foster a very different climate than authoritarian rule. Rule-
governed change is a basic principle. The use of coercive force outside the
structure of rules is proscribed. Trust, reciprocity, and rule of law are at the
heart of democratic politics.


Moving in this direction presses us away from the notion of a
democratic political regime narrowly defined in terms of political
institutions, formal structures of authority, or a defined set of
institutions and rules of the game; and pushes us towards the broader
notion of liberal or democratic society. So it is not the democratic
regime that matters, but rather some broader, more diffuse notion of
a liberal society that is crucial. Thus, even in the case of democracy and
democratic peace, it seems that ‘political regime is not necessarily the
most important factor. This conclusion is also interesting because it
underscores why democratic peace theory is so difficult to apply
convincingly to Latin America. It is precisely this externalization of domestic
democratic norms thesis that is so difficult to apply convincingly to patterns
of conflict in Latin America: (i) because the fortunes of domestic democracy
have fluctuated so widely whilst regional order has been relatively stable;
and (ii) because of the striking contrast between frequently high levels of
domestic disorder and social violence (even under democratic regimes)
and the relative degree of inter-state peace.


Second, and more positively, the debates surrounding democratic
peace theory have shifted towards an emphasis not on a static regime
type but rather on regime change, in this case on processes of
democratization. Unfortunately the US academic market in this area


32 Steve Chan, 'In search of Democratic Peace: Problems and Promise', Mershon International
Studies Review, 41, 1997,  . 77.


52


POLITICAL REGIMES AND FOREIGN POLICIES: AN INTRODUCTION


has been dominated by one version of the democratization thesis: the
claim that, whilst well-consolidated democracies interact peacefully,
democratizing regimes are as, if not more, aggressive and war-prone than
other kinds of states. 33 Another of the reasons why Latin America is
interesting is precisely that it highlights the different ways in which
democratization may be associated with cooperative or conflictual foreign
policies. In the case of the Southern Cone since the early 1980s,
democratization was related not to conflict but rather to increased levels
of inter-state cooperation. The development of rapprochement between
Brazil and Argentina therefore provides an important counter-example to
the claim that democratizing states are necessarily war-prone.34 Here it
was democratization, rather than democracy per se, that was central to the
rapprochement between Brazil and Argentina in the mid 1980s rather
than the idea of a 'democratic peace between two well consolidated
democracies. In this period, the shared interests and perhaps shared identities
came rather from a common sense of vulnerability: the shared conviction
that democracy in both countries was extremely fragile and that non-
democratic forces were by no means out of the game (witness the military
rebellions in Argentina in April 1987, January 1989 and December 1990).
Especially in Argentina, this led to the overt use of foreign policy as a
means of protecting fragile and newly established democracies. In part this
reflected the close and very concrete link between conflict resolution abroad
and democratic consolidation at home – the need to promote regional
pacification in order to deprive the nationalists of causes around which to
mobilize opinion, to demand a greater political role, or to press for


33 Edward D. Mansfield and Jack Synder, Democratization and the Danger of War.
International Security 20, 1. Summer 1995, p. 5-38. There have also been claims that
promoting liberalization and peace-keeping can have destabilizing effects, see, for example,
Roland Paris, 'Peacebuilding and the Limits of Liberal Internationalism', International Security
22, 2, 1997: 54-89.


34 For a strong Kantian account of southern cone international politics see Philippe C.
Schmitter, Change in Regime Type and Progress in International Relations. In: Emanuel
Adler and Beverly Crawford eds., Progress in Post War International Relations, New York:
Columbia U.P., 1991.I have analyzed this democratizing logic in more detail in 'An
emerging security community in South America?', In: Emanuel Adler and Michael Barnett
eds., Security Communities, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998).


53


ANDREW HURRELL


militarization and rearmament. Regional peace therefore becomes central
to the maintenance of successful civil-military relations at home. But it
also reflected the perceived importance of building up the idea and the
rhetoric of external support: the idea of a club of states to which only
certain governments are allowed to belong and in which cooperation
becomes the international expression and symbol both of new democracies
and of the end of old rivalries. Elsewhere, however, the cases of Colombia
and Venezuela and Peru and Ecuador seem to support the thesis that
domestically insecure liberalizing states in unstable neighbourhoods are
potential problems for regional security.


Third, the whole of the democratic peace debate has been based on
the links between a particular regime type and a particular kind of foreign
policy, ie the resort to war.35 Perhaps the most striking gap in the recent
theoretical and comparative literature (certainly in English) has been the
absence of systematic work on the links between economic and political
liberalization on the one hand and foreign policy broadly conceived on
the other. This category of theorizing gives rise to a number of potential
liberalizing 'logics that can impact on foreign policy. One set has to do
with the domestic aspect of foreign policy. Thus we might expect that
democratization will change the character of foreign policymaking:
increasing the pluralism of the foreign policymaking process and opening
up a greater role for societal actors (firms, parties, social movements). The
character of the resultant foreign policy will depend on which societal
groups are empowered in this way. But the analytical question is crucial:
to what extent has democratization altered the nature of the foreign policy-
making process? We might also wish to enquire into the extent to which
democratization affected the capacity and coherence of the state. This might
be important in understanding how far democratizing states, especially
those experiencing turbulent transitions, have the capacity for any kind of
stable or coherent foreign policy. It might also push certain states towards
such a loss of control and capacity that they become the target of foreign
policy concern or intervention on the part of other states.


35 As noted in the chapter by Vladimir Kulagin in this volume.


54


POLITICAL REGIMES AND FOREIGN POLICIES: AN INTRODUCTION


A second cluster of expectations has to do with the plausible links
that might exist between liberalizing states and their policy towards
international institutions. Thus political and economic liberalization may
push states towards deeper integration in institutions. In order to enhance
the credibility of programmes of liberal economic reform, governments
will be impelled to engage actively with international economic
institutions. 36 External credibility therefore becomes a necessary condition
for successful domestic reform. Or, in the political arena, relatively
unconsolidated democratic governments may seek external and binding
human rights regimes precisely in order to provide external support in the
face of their domestic challenges (something that fits the European human
rights system rather better than the Inter-American one).


IV. REGIME TYPE AS A PRODUCT OF INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS


The problem with the above discussion is that it rests on a
conventional and somewhat barren separation between the ‘domestic 
and the  international . What states are, what purposes they seek to
promote, and their capacity to promote them, has long been shaped by
external factors and by the dominant pattern of international relations
within the system as a whole. The internal world of domestic politics and
the external world of international relations have been closely intertwined
throughout the history of European international society. The links
between state-making and war-making were explored in the 1970s by
Anderson and Tilly, but reflect a tradition of thought that goes back at
least to Machiavelli.37 Moreover, if the links between state-making and
war-making were close, the links between geopolitical competition and
nationalism were closer still. Images of the collective self and foreign other
flourished on the battlefield as nowhere else. It is war and conflict within
the confines of a political system based on exclusivist conceptions of
sovereignty that, together with industrialization and modernization,


36See Miles Kahler ed., Liberalization and Foreign Policy, New York: Columbia U.P., 1997.
37 For a recent treatment see Bruce D. Porter, War and the Rise of the State: The Military
Foundations of Modern Politics, New York: Free Press, 1994.


55


ANDREW HURRELL


explains the emergence and power of political nationalism. In addition, as
both Weber and Marx recognized, the unparalleled dynamism of capitalist
industrialization was fuelled by the tensions that existed between increasing
market integration on the one hand and continued political fragmentation
and inter-state rivalry and conflict on the other. Finally, as much recent
work has argued, European political thought and our stock of ideas about
the state and about political order within the state were very closely
connected to both external imperial expansion and to patterns of war and
peace within Europe (as with the recent work of Tuck, Pagden, Hont, and
Rothschild).


This pattern continued, indeed deepened, in the course of the 20th
century. Many of the most important changes in the character of European
states and in the type of political regime were driven by changes in the
international and global context. The vast expansion of state power and
state functions; the rise of the welfare state; the development of expanded
understandings of citizenship were closely bound up with the geopolitical
conflicts of the period from 1870 to 1950 and with the transnational
ideological confrontation between liberalism on the one hand and fascism
and communism on the other. Although not the only factor, war and
transnational ideological conflict drove the expansion of the European
state, in terms of increased range of agencies and ministries, vastly increased
budgets and levels of taxation, numbers of state personnel, and scope and
range of legislation. These developments also involved a shift in the
boundaries between politics and the market and between public and private
spheres, and help explain new understandings of the responsibilities of the
state to its citizens and of an expanded conception of social rights reflected
in the rise of the welfare state. As Michael Howard puts it: ‘war and welfare
went hand in hand'.


These changes were not simply apparent in the increased capacity
and 'strength' of the West European state but also involved the revisioning
of relations between state and society. To quote Geoff Eley:


...the major increments of general European democracy earlier in
the twentieth century depended on the prior condition of societal
breakdown or transformation produced by war and produced, it


56


POLITICAL REGIMES AND FOREIGN POLICIES: AN INTRODUCTION


should be said, by war of a particular kind, namely total war, or
warfare requiring general societal mobilization over several years,
bringing big expansions of the state's presence in and demands upon
society, its resources and territorial population.


Consensus on the increased degree of state involvement in the
economy and society was reinforced by the impact of external economic
forces, especially of the Great Depression, and the emergence of new
understandings of the possibilities of economic management by the state
· diffused by what we would today term transnational policy networks.


If we focus in on the period after 1945 it is hard not to exaggerate
the extent to which the evolving character of governments and regimes in
West Europe was indissolubly connected with the emergence of a secure
and increasingly well-institutionalized regional security community. This
dramatic shift within Europe from war and competition to regional
cooperation and then to the promotion of regional integration in turn
depended on a very particular set of geopolitical circumstances. It depended,
first, on the existence of a common external threat together with superpower
protection against that threat, embodied in an alliance which, from the
mid-1950s, became increasingly militarized and institutionalized. For all
the recurrent crises within the Alliance, NATO cemented the historic shift
in US (and also British) commitment to Western Europe, created a
community of fate constructed around extended nuclear deterrence, and
served as a magnet for new members (Greece and Turkey in 1952, West
Germany in 1955, Spain in 1986). This acceptance of almost total security
dependence on the United States was one of the essential compromises on
which the success of European cooperation and integration was built.
Indeed it is possible to argue that success was only possible because the
immensely difficult tasks of politico-military cooperation and security
could be left to one side. In addition, the naturalness of Keynesian economic
management within Europe was accompanied by a highly favourable
external economic environment with geopolitics pushing the United States
towards a relatively benign economic hegemony (at least up to 1971):
Marshall Aid, tolerance of the protectionism and discrimination inherent
in the EC, and an acceptance of the compromise of embedded liberalism


57


ANDREW HURRELL


– that liberalization abroad should be balanced by state activism and
welfarism at home.


The move from war to cooperation depended, second, on a solution
to the German Problem. European integration was a response both to the
Cold War and to the German problem that had bedevilled Europe since
1870 and had brought Europe to its knees. If European integration was
pressed from outside by the threat of the Soviet Union on the one side
and by the hegemonic leadership of the US on the other, it was also explicitly
promoted as a means of managing German power. Although the division
of Germany mitigated the fears of other Europeans, it certainly did not
remove them. Europe needed German economic power to fuel post-war
recovery and German military power to counter the Soviet threat. Indeed
the specific project of regional integration arose precisely as the preferred
means of dealing with this problem: permitting rearmament and economic
rehabilitation by tying a semi-sovereign Germany into an integrated
network of institutions in both the economic field (EC) and the military
(NATO/WEU). From Germany's perspective, regionalism provided the
essential multilateral cover under which it could first of all reestablish its
diplomatic position and recover its sovereignty and, more recently,
reestablish its influence. This strategy worked, above all, because of the
particular circumstances in which Germany found itself. For Adenauer,
the conditions of German history made Westbindung, institutional
enmeshment and the acceptance of some supranational authority the only
viable road to the recovery of, first, German sovereignty and, then, its
capacity for international action. (Note the close association between
European institutions and the recovery, not loss sovereignty and autonomy).
A little later, as Brandt recognized so clearly, Ostpolitik was only viable
because the security of the western anchor removed the memory of Rapallo
and fears of a return to Schaukelpolitik of the past.


Third, the shift towards regional cooperation depended on the the
process of decolonization which ended the unparalleled dominance that
European powers had previously exercised over the world. Decolonization
reduced even the strongest of the imperial powers to second-rank power
status, had profound impact on their domestic societies and politics, and
reoriented their foreign policies and foreign economic relations firmly


58


POLITICAL REGIMES AND FOREIGN POLICIES: AN INTRODUCTION


towards their European neighbours (with British hankering after the special
relationship being the most important exception). This enforced adaptation
was far from smooth and unproblematic, and varied from country to
country; but it remains one of the most important ways in which a changing
international context affected the character of the European state. Finally,
the Cold War set the boundaries to Europe.  European integration was in
reality only sub-regional integration between a small group of countries
with compatible values and similar economic and security policies. This
both facilitated the process of regional rapprochement and integration
and meant that the difficult decisions about what to do about Eastern
Europe could be left aside. Whilst the rhetoric of a reunified Germany
and of a reintegrated East was maintained, the division suited most West
Europeans and was a central element of what many took to be the stability
of the post-1945 European order. It gave Western Europe '... the peculiar
advantage of never having to worry, from 1951 to 1989, about the
implications of trying to incorporate into “Europe” the even poorer lands
to the East'. The Cold War also dictated the nature of relations with
important parts of the periphery, ensuring a close military relationship
with Turkey and the continued involvement of Spain, Portugal and Greece
with the ‘West , despite their authoritarian politics.


The point of this brief sketch of Europe is to illustrate just how
far the international system has to be seen as a cause as well as a
consequence of domestic politics and the character of domestic political
regimes. Even apparently secure and well-established states have been
shaped by their interaction with the international system, just as the
international system has been shaped by the interaction amongst states.
Reflecting both greater domestic weakness and far higher levels of
external vulnerability, this picture is even more true of post-colonial
states. Consider Christopher Clapham's analysis of the creation and
the subsequent unravelling of the post-colonial state in Africa:


The power of rulers derives not only from the material resources
and ideological support of their own people, but equally from
their ability to draw on the ideological and material resources
provided by other states
and also non-states, such as


59


ANDREW HURRELL


transnational religious organizations or business corporations. The
weaker the state in terms of its size and capabilities, its level of
physical control over its people and territory, and its ability or
inability to embody an idea of the state shared by its people, the
greater the extent to which it will need to call on external
recognition and support. 38


States cannot, then, be seen as closed-off entities that interact
with the external world through something called 'foreign policy'.
Take two examples from Brazilian history. First, Topik's discussion of
the strength of the $19^{th}$ century Brazilian state:


...the imperial state's legitimacy and authority derived as much
from its role as intermediary between Brazil and foreign powers
as from state domestic control. Prosperous international trade
and European loans sustained the Treasury. In addition, the
national state's sovereignty was recognized by overseas powers
before most of its own subjects recognized it. Foreign states and
merchants were more responsible for supporting Brazil's post-
colonial state through the revenue they provided than for
undermining it. This foreign support allowed Portuguese America
to in fact consolidate its territory while Spanish America
fragmented. However, the external prop to Brazil's monarch
was a mixed blessing. It meant that the state did not much
penetrate the interior.... While this diversified dependence meant
that imperial statesmen could play off foreign and domestic
interests, the state's space for manoeuvre was sharply limited. 39


The point is not to claim that Topik is able to resolve the long-
standing arguments about the strength and character of the $19^{th}$ century
Brazilian state (involving Faoro, Murilo de Carvalho, Uricoechea
amongst others). It is only to highlight the interpenetration of the
external and internal and the degree to which studying any political


38 Christopher Clapham, Africa and the International System. The Politics of State Survival,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996, p. 11.


39 Steven Topik, Precocious Globalization: The Effect of the World Market on State Building in
Brazil in the 19th Century.


60


POLITICAL REGIMES AND FOREIGN POLICIES: AN INTRODUCTION


regime presses us to consider what Skocpol called the ‘dual anchorage 
of the state: anchored on one side within domestic society and, on the
other, within three external arenas: the international political system,
the capitalist global economy and transnational civil society. Or take
Brazil during the Cold War. The Cold War was not just a type of
international system that pushed and shoved Brazil to adopt particular
foreign policies. It affected Brazilian foreign policy far more powerfully
through the degree to which anti-communism shaped the character of
the regime domestically and the degree to which ideological
confrontation deeply affected the character of Brazilian domestic
politics.


If we are considering the ways in which the external world affects
the type and character of domestic regime, we need, finally, to note
the degree to which democracy and democratic values have themselves
become more firmly established within the normative structure of
international society. This is a trend that developed in the second half
of the 20th century but which gathered pace after the end of the Cold
War. It has involved: the broadening of the human rights regime to
accord a more central role to self-determination and political democracy;
the increasing tendency for international security to be defined in terms
of both humanitarian crises and the existence of non-democratic rulers
in the states undergoing such crises; the increased role of democracy in
many aspects of the work of the United Nations (both in democracy
supporting activities such as election-monitoring, and in democracy
as a central element of post-conflict reconstruction); and in the growth
of democratic conditionality both in terms of bilateral and multilateral
aid and in terms of the membership of regional groupings (above all
in both Europe and the Americas). For some, the core constitutive
norm of sovereignty has come to be reinterpreted in such a way that
the full exercise of sovereign rights is made increasingly conditional on
the continuation of certain kinds of domestic political regime.


It is true of course that these changes remain limited, certainly
in terms of formal changes in the international legal order. It is also
true that the coercive enforcement of these norms remains highly
contested. The liberal logic of seeking to institutionalize democracy at


61


ANDREW HURRELL


the international level is contested both because of the inherent
difficulty of translating coercive pro-democratic interventionism into
agreed and sustainable general rules; and because of the power-political
dominance of western, democratic states in general and, of course, the
United States in particular. But it is also true that the character of
domestic regimes has become ever more central to the concerns of
international law and institutions; that democracy has become more
central to the foreign policy practices of a number of major states,
most especially the United States; and that the preponderance of
democratic states creates a  global magnetic field' that inevitably
influences the behaviour of all actors in world politics, as Vladimir
Kulagin puts it in his chapter in this volume. 40


V. CONCLUSIONS


It is not difficult to show just how important the external is for
understanding the character of domestic politics, including the character
of states that see their own identity very much in particularist or
exceptionalist terms. 41 This is yet another of the ways in which a theory
of foreign policy is necessarily linked to a theory of international
relations and of the dynamics of the international system. The
importance of focussing on these kinds of ‘outside-in' dynamics has a
very long history. For all its flaws, dependency theory and the traditions
from which it developed, was substantially correct in arguing that both
the interests and the identities of states need to be understood within the
context of the 'transnational whole' within which they are embedded.
Within Political Science this way of thinking has been emphasized by
Peter Gourevitch in his writing on the  second-image reversed'. 42


It has been applied in several contexts  for example Peter


40 See also the argument in Robert Frank's paper that 'an international democratic logic has
been established, transcending the interests of each democratic country', p. 11-14.
41 See Ira Katznelson and Martin Shefter eds., Shaped by War and Trade. International
Influences on American Political Development, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2002.
42 Peter Gourevitch, The Second Image Reversed: International Sources of Domestic
Politics, International Organization 32, 4, 1978, p. 881-911.


62


POLITICAL REGIMES AND FOREIGN POLICIES: AN INTRODUCTION


Katzenstein's work on the foreign economic policies of small states.
But it has not affected the analysis of foreign policy as much as one
might imagine, or one might have hoped. Many societal approaches
to the formation of state preferences still treat the domestic arena as
separate and closed-off. Moravcsik's liberal theory is a good example.
We need, then, to take much more seriously the way in which
understandings of interests as well as the character of the state and of
the regime are constantly being shaped and influenced by interaction
with the external world.


However, and this is the second conclusion, care is needed in
linking any particular configuration of external forces to a specific
regime or regime type. In the 1970s it was common to see the
emergence of bureaucratic-authoritarian regimes in South America as
being related to the functioning of peripheral capitalism and also to
see the foreign policy of those regimes also as driven by the functional
logic of capitalism. Thus foreign policy was somehow a function of
the 'asssociated-dependent character of its economic model. This kind
of direct linkage (or even the more modest suggestion of an ‘elective
affinity') manifestly fails: the idea of a development model or foreign
policy being a 'function of some systemic logic represents a hopelessly
inadequate kind of explanation, not least because it is devoid of agency.
But, empirically, trying to tie everything up in this neat structuralist
bundle proved inadequate for understanding either the diversity of
foreign policies chosen by similarly-situated states or, as suggested earlier,
the links between economic models and political regimes. The
challenge, then, is to reincorporate the interpenetration of external
and internal but without repeating the overly deterministic or overly
functionalist accounts of the past.


63


3


POLITICAL REGIMES AND FOREIGN POLICIES:
ATTITUDES TOWARDS WAR AND PEACE


Robert Frank


Increasingly, and understandably, historians are looking towards
political analysts and their different theories, and how these theories
work as experiments within the vast laboratory of History. Among
the many current schools of thought, two theories – realist and liberal
can help our understanding of the link between “political regimes”
and "foreign policies”. For realists, or most of them, the type of regime
is of little importance. A state has its “national interest to defend,
which is completely independent from the nature of its institutions.
The geopolitical position of the country, its security interests, economic
development, and ability to wield power or influence, have greater
influence on the way foreign policy is defined than the type of political
regime. In the liberal camp, the opposite is true: ideology influences
diplomacy. States, with their different visions of the world according
to their different political regimes, thus conduct different foreign
policies. Liberals especially emphasise the specific nature of the foreign
policies of democratic countries.


Both interpretations have their strengths and their truths. There
is certainly some element of continuity in French foreign policy,
through its successive political regimes, from periods of absolute
monarchy to the Fifth Republic. In particular, from the moment
Germany began to come together, the German question has been a
French obsession, from Napoléon III to the middle of the twentieth
century. Geopolitical security issues were more or less the same during
the Second Empire, the Third Republic and the beginning of the Fourth
Republic. In these cases, the “realist interpretation seems to work well.
However, the opposite can be said of the Federal Republic of Germany,


65


ROBERT FRANK


being a democracy, with a foreign policy radically different from the
Second and Third Reich. We may even say that this represents a desired
and conscious break from the Machtpolitik of the previous regimes.
This example tends towards the liberal interpretation. There is a third
example, rather difficult to define, which has been widely debated:
did the USSR follow a fundamentally Russian foreign policy, in its
continuation of Russian interests in Europe and throughout the world,
independent of ideology or communist regimes, as maintained by the
realists? Or, as the liberals maintain, did Soviet totalitarianism make
the USSR a different kind of state, with different objectives and specific
diplomatic methods?


There is surely a way of verifying the validity of these theories.
To try to understand whether the link between the type of political
regime and the definition of its foreign policy is a secondary,
fundamental, episodic or structural element, we must weigh up,
historically, the relationship these regimes have with the question of
war and peace which is so precise, concrete, and central to international
relations as a whole.


At this stage, we discover the complexity of the picture. The
link between democracy and peace is not an obvious one, no more
than the link between dictators, totalitarianism and war is obvious.
This is why, in the end, democratic countries are obliged to treat
different authoritarian regimes differently, and this does not necessarily
provide what is needed to establish an international democracy. For
this there is a different series of contradictions that historians must try
to elucidate.


PEACEFUL AND AGGRESSIVE DEMOCRACY


BEFORE 1914: THE TENTATIVE BEGINNINGS OF DEMOCRATIC
DIFFERENTIATION BETWEEN WAR AND PEACE


No, peace is not the prerogative of democracy, and not all
authoritarian regimes or dictatorships want war. The First French
Republic learnt at its own expense that it was not so easy to export


66


POLITICAL REGIMES AND FOREIGN POLICIES: ATTITUDES TOWARDS WAR AND PEACE


democracy by force. Certainly, she was invaded, at first, and the war,
initially a defensive war, was, for her, a means of freeing her endangered
homeland. But she quickly took a liking to war, to help create “Sister
Republics" and a European order favourable to France. And so the
Republic lost its soul, and to the benefit of a General, Napoléon
Bonaparte. During the 19th century, Republicans remembered this
lesson. In 1870, with the exception of those who rallied to the regime,
they were hostile to the war that Napoléon III and his supporters had
undertaken against the German states. Immediately following the defeat
of Sedan, the Second Empire collapsed, and the Republic was declared.
The Republic had to carry on with the war, but did so as only a defensive
war, until defeat came in 1871. At the end of the $19^{th}$ and beginning
of the $20^{th}$ century, the Republican Right was tempted by “power
nationalism , which spread widely through French society, and through
some European societies. within the framework of different political
regimes. But as far as France was concerned, the Republic, by
undertaking colonial wars, diverted nationalism towards horizons
outside of Europe. In the spirit of the time, these conflicts were not
considered as real wars; they were simply expeditions of “pacification”
and of the “civilisation” of “savage” peoples. The idea of real war, which
would take place in Europe over the revenge and recuperation of Alsace-
Lorraine – lost after the 1871 defeat –, dwindled in Republican France.
Ideas of peace based on the notion of law developed in several circles;
Léon Bourgeois was already thinking of a League of Nations. In fact,
in 1914, whatever Republican France's share in the responsibility for
the outbreak of war, her attitude was relatively moderate and
moderating. On the contrary, the authoritarian Russian regime and
the authoritarian or semi-authoritarian Austro-Hungarian and German
regimes took the most serious decisions, those that accelerated the
spiral. Britain, a liberal, parliamentary monarchy in the process of
democratisation, entered into the war rather reluctantly, and the
American democracy only committed itself in 1917.


We must therefore make a first distinction. On the one hand,
democratic countries did not hesitate to organise military expeditions
within the context of their colonialist expansion or of their imperialism,


67


ROBERT FRANK


and given that Germany's William II was embarking on the same path,
they were not the only ones doing so. Here, the realist interpretation
is valid: there seem to be few differences between the foreign policies
of the great nations of the Belle Epoque, whatever their political regime.
But on the other hand, democratic countries were reluctant to commit
themselves to a war between powers. Once wars were declared, they
were entered into unenthusiastically, yet with a tranquil determination,
as they were certain of the justness of their actions. Recent research
shows how important the democratic discourse was for war propaganda
between 1914 and 1918, in both France and England. But the liberal
interpretation is also valid to a certain extent. Of course, if we adopt
the point of view according to which the imperialism of countries
now at the “supreme state of capitalism” were the main cause of the
Great War, then democratic countries are just as much to blame, if
not more, for this general catastrophe. But although imperialist rivalry
poisoned international relations until around 1911-1912, it seems to
have been relatively subdued after this date, and other causes and other
factors led in fact to the outbreak of war. Firstly, rivalry in the Balkans
between Russia and Austria-Hungary, two great powers in crisis but
to whom imperialism was of secondary importance, and whose
capitalism was less developed. And secondly, the system of alliances
that each European country, frightened of losing guarantees of security,
wanted to respect. This last and fundamental reason brings us back to
the realist interpretation of international relations.


1914-1945: THE SPECIFICITY OF DEMOCRATIC POLITICS,
FROM FAILURE TO VICTORY


Through the analysis of the causes of the Second World War,
liberal theory could begin to take the lead in the debate. No one would
deny that differences between political regimes played a fundamental
role in the international crises of the 1930s. Japan, dominated by the
military, threw itself into an aggressive policy towards China. Fascist
Italy invaded Ethiopia. And Nazi Germany carried the supreme
responsibility for the outbreak of war in 1939. The democratic


68


POLITICAL REGIMES AND FOREIGN POLICIES: ATTITUDES TOWARDS WAR AND PEACE


countries, on the contrary, did everything possible to avoid war. From
1919 onwards, they developed the will or the vague desire to establish
an international democratic order, guarantor of peace collective security,
through the creation of the League of Nations proposed by Wilson,
President of the United States. The system failed rather quickly, due
to structural weakness and the desertion of America, its principal
democracy, despite having been the architect of its creation. In 1928,
the French and American democracies, through the Briand-Kellog Pact,
took the initiative of declaring war on war, and this pact was signed by
around sixty countries of extremely diverse political regimes. With
the crisis of the 1930s, democratic countries returned to foreign policies
of national egoism. Unable to rely on collective security, which had
shown itself to be powerless in the face of Japanese and Italian
aggression, they went as far as to wanting to “appease” Hitler. Pacifism
thus seems profoundly rooted in democratic society. At the Munich
conference of September 1938, France and Britain accepted the
dismembering of Czechoslovakia. The British Prime Minister, Neville
Chamberlain, thus hoped to satisfy the Führer last request, but failed
to realise that politically, this policy of appeasement served to reinforce
it, increasingly persuading it of the weakness of democratic regimes,
and confirming its desire for military expansion.


According to Churchill, democratic countries had agreed to
dishonour themselves to avoid war, resulting in dishonour and war,
the following year, with Hitler's decision to invade Poland. Beyond
the weaknesses of democratic countries, which were therefore also
responsible for the outbreak of generalised war as they failed to stop
Hitler earlier, when there was still time. Here, more than prior to
1914, a differentiation of foreign policies between political regimes
exists. This differentiation seems to have been confirmed during the
Second World War: the solidarity between France and Britain in 1939-
1940 was based even more explicitly on democratic values. After the
fall of France, Anglo-American solidarity was strengthened by the
Charter of the United Nations, defining the aims of democratic war.
And the objective of the “United Nations”, the war coalition envisaged


69


ROBERT FRANK


by Franklin Roosevelt, was to create an “Organisation of peace, basing
peace on law and democracy, with the help nevertheless of four or five
“policemen” who would have a permanent seat on the Security Council.
Idealism no longer precluded a certain dose of realism.


But realist interpretations of international relations have no
reason to give up the debate. Whatever the differences between political
regimes may be, countries have in fact adjusted their foreign policies
according to their national interests. In 1919-1920 the United States
did not join the League of Nations, and carried out a policy of force in
Central America which was hardly democratic. The French and Belgian
democracies did not hesitate to attack the new German democracy, by
intervening in the Ruhr in 1923 to obtain effective payment of the
war reparations foreseen by the Versailles Treaty. The weakness of the
League of Nations, faced with the invasions of Manchuria and Ethiopia,
were mainly the responsibility of France and Britain, and their policy
of appeasement towards Hitler was presented as a Realpolitik. Finally,
democratic countries carried out their war against Nazi totalitarianism
by forming an alliance with Soviet totalitarianism. Nevertheless, in
many ways, these last events constituted a crossroads in the twentieth
century. The Second World War marks a fundamental turning point.


AFTER 1945: DEMOCRACIES AND THE MUNICH SYNDROME


In the end, the Realpolitik of appeasement of 1938 proved
unrealistic, and this was the main lesson learnt by democratic countries
after 1945. Precisely, the “reality” of the Nazi regime and of its ideology
had been under-estimated by Neville Chamberlain. After 1945,
democratic countries, marked by this “Munich syndrome” now refused
to believe that the type of regime was of no consequence in times of
war or peace. In particular, all paralysing pacifism preventing action
against aggressive dictatorships must now be rejected to preserve peace.
Against the threat of totalitarianism from the USSR, a firm stance
was adopted almost immediately. The doctrine of “containment”
against the former Soviet ally was quickly elaborated by Truman's
America. American Cold War policy aimed to extend democratic


70


POLITICAL REGIMES AND FOREIGN POLICIES: ATTITUDES TOWARDS WAR AND PEACE


resistance to Nazi totalitarianism. The main idea was to show the
strength of democratic countries, and never again let an image of
weakness come across in any way, as had been the case in the 1930s
and which had favoured Hitler's intentions. Hence the constant
vigilance regarding the USSR. However, this did not mean a vision of
democratic idealism, as right-wing dictatorships were maintained and
furthered (Franco, Salazar) or even brought to power (Syngman Rhee,
Pinochet) with American backing, under the pretext that they were
the best defence against communism. The democratic ideal was no
longer defended with idealism. A short war, embarked upon in good
time, was seen as a better guarantee of peace than a pacifism which
threatened to strengthen the enemies of peace and democracy, and to
finish by setting off a longer, more costly and bloodier war. This Munich
syndrome did not always work well, due to poor analysis of the
situation, for example against Nasser during the Suez crisis. Israeli then
proceeded to carry out preventive war in 1967 with the Six Day War.
The advantage was that greater border security was achieved, but the
disadvantage was certainly the deterioration of the international image
of Israel, from the moment it was no longer a country under threat,
but an "occupying power.


It was impossible to declare open war on the USSR during the
first Cold War, from the end of the 1940s to the beginning of the
1960s, nor during the second Cold War, from the 1970s to the 1980s.
The risk for the entire planet would have been too great. The method
of indirect confrontation, of Cold War was much more effective in
the end, even if did not plan for communist regimes to collapse in the
way they did. In any case, these regimes collapsed. After the fall of the
Berlin Wall and the implosion of the USSR, the Munich syndrome
worked with some efficiency against the aggression of Saddam Hussein
in Kuwait in 1991 (even before the Soviet regime completely
disintegrated), and against Milosevic in 1999. After the terrorist attack
on New York's Twin Towers on the 11th of September 2001, preventive
democratic war was used against Afghanistan in 2002 and Iraq in 2003.
Almost all democratic countries supported these conflicts, with the
exception of the last one. We will come back to this point.


71


ROBERT FRANK


We can draw several conclusions from this evolution. There really
is a specificity of the foreign policy of democratic countries which
became apparent quite early on, even though it was overshadowed by
other phenomena. Whether or not they were colonial imperialists, as
was the case with other political regimes, the fact is that these
democratic countries were states which also put their own national
interests first. But during the twentieth century, especially at and
following the turning point of the Second World War, democratic
values became increasingly internalised, and formed an integral part of
the national interests of democratic countries. Hence democratic
solidarity, transcending democratic countries themselves, the most
obvious examples of which are both Atlanticism and European
construction. In practice, it is increasingly difficult to distinguish
between realist and liberal visions, as the defence of national interests,
of the international balance, and of democracy, increasingly converge.
The differences can now be found in the balance of the different
concepts. It is significant that the policies of George W. Bush both go
back to Wilsonism (spreading democracy throughout the world to
build world peace) and completely diverge from it (force taking
precedence over law). Other lessons can also be learnt from this. War,
which democratic countries did not desire during the first half of the
twentieth century, has, in a peculiar way, strengthened them. There
were more democratic countries in Europe after 1918. After 1945,
the spirit of the Resistance against Nazism across the European continent
and the spirit of the “people's war in Britain pushed democracy to
reform, to construct or strengthen the Welfare State and, at best,
integrate the masses into its system. The Cold War also stimulated
and reinforced democratic countries, pushing them towards constant
reform and social and economic modernisation.


Of course, a distinction must be made between democratic
countries. Some did not need military conflict or the stimulus of the
Cold War to strengthen themselves as democratic regimes, such as
Sweden, Switzerland or Austria after 1955, not forgetting post-1945
Finland, a special case. Their foreign policy had been neutrality, and


72


POLITICAL REGIMES AND FOREIGN POLICIES: ATTITUDES TOWARDS WAR AND PEACE


therefore very different to the foreign policy of the United States,
France or Britain. Other democratic countries, although not neutral
countries, did not develop a policy of democratic strength. The
distinction between great, medium and small powers is therefore still
valid within democratic countries, as well as between those who attach
importance to their political influence in the world, and those that are
happy concentrating on their internal well-being. Nevertheless, they
all benefit from the victories of democratic countries, however much
or little they were involved in the fight. In fact, two points must be
emphasised here. Democratic countries have, without exception, won
all their wars (including the Cold War) against authoritarian, semi-
authoritarian and totalitarian regimes, against all aggressors (on the
condition that war was fought against them) and warmongers of
genocide. Democracy, whose objective is peace, seems better armed
for war. These countries have richness (it is precisely developed countries
which have the easiest access to democracy); but this is not the only
reason. They are better able to mobilise public opinion, and even their
economic resources. It is rather a paradox to see that the liberal state of
the United Kingdom was able to organise its war economy quicker
and better than the totalitarian state of Nazi Germany.


In this field also, incitement and stimulation are more effective
than autocracy. On the other hand, democratic countries have lost
wars
yes, they have lost some that have proved “illegitimate”,
precisely on the basis of democratic principles: for example, Indo-
China, Algeria, and Vietnam. As far as these conflicts are concerned,
there came a time when public opinion did not support government
action in war. Most certainly, public opinion, seldom interested in
foreign policy, except where war is concerned, because in fact the
principle strength of democratic countries, through freedom of speech.
This propels governments to victory in wars seen as legitimate; and
pushes them to get out as best they can often after a turnaround
themselves  when a war is not seen to have this legitimacy. The
dynamics of democratic countries are defined through their clashes
with non-democratic political regimes. Between them, the latter present


73


ROBERT FRANK


several difficulties regarding foreign policy and attitudes towards war
and peace.


AGGRESSIVE AND DEFENSIVE DICTATORSHIPS


There are huge differences between authoritarian and dictatorial
regimes, and amongst these we must distinguish between those
dictatorships which fall within totalitarianism and those which do
not. Dictatorships existed before and after those totalitarian regimes
which have been features of history, anchored in the twentieth century:
the fascist and Nazi forms of totalitarianism, and the Soviet form of
totalitarianism. The common features between them are well-known
and numerous: the search for integration of the masses, both by
repression and by adherence to terror, and by seduction; one single
party with one single ideology in power, or ideocracy; a leadership
cult; a system of concentration camps and mass murder; huge parades
and youth indoctrination; and the certitude that ideology – fascist or
communist – will end up dominating the world. But the differences
between Nazi and fascist totalitarianism on the one hand, and Soviet
totalitarianism on the other, are fundamental, and have not been
without influence on international relations.


TOTALITARIANISM OF THE TWILIGHT OF THE GODS OF WAR AND
TOTALITARIANISM OF THE DAWNS THAT PROMISE PEACE


First of all, these two ideologies are not the same. They come
together only in the way they reject liberal democracy and legitimise
violence. As far as the other issues are concerned, they are in total
opposition. In actual fact, one of the anchors of fascism was indeed,
from its very beginnings, communism. Of course, there was the
Germano-Soviet Pact of August 1939. But Hitler declared his relief
to Mussolini on the $21^{st}$ of June 1941 on the eve of the invasion of
the USSR: he could end this unnatural collaboration between Berlin
and Moscow, and achieve one of the objectives of fascism, the end of
communism. As far as anti-fascism was concerned, from 1935 to 1939


74


POLITICAL REGIMES AND FOREIGN POLICIES: ATTITUDES TOWARDS WAR AND PEACE


then from 1941 to the 1960s, it was used as one of the preferred tools
of the USSR to rally the largest number of democrats to its cause. Both
forms of totalitarianism kill liberty, but equality is denied by fascism
and, on the contrary, claimed by communism. In the one case, ideology
gives explicit priority to the law of the strongest, the hierarchy of
nations, the hierarchy of races in the case of Nazism, the hierarchy
around leaders at every level of society, and class collaboration. In the
other, emphasis is laid on the search for equality, social justice, the end
of exploitation of man by man, the class struggle, and the institution
of socialism; then, when a society of abundance is reached, the advent
of the “communism” which will witness the disappearance of the class
struggle and the wasting away of the State. Fascism openly denounces
democracy, whereas Stalinism takes the word at face value and
hypocritically proclaims the liberties and rights of man inherent in the
1936 Constitution, which, of course, is never applied. This leads to
the two forms of totalitarianism which contradict one another regarding
“war and peace”. War lies at the heart of fascist ideology, whereas peace,
on the contrary, is necessary for Stalinism, whose violence is expressed
differently. It is a violence which lies within the Soviet regime, and
thus within communist-imposed regimes, and not a violence imposed
on international relations. In fact, quite the opposite. Precisely, Stalin
wanted precisely to build “socialism in a single country in the 1920s
and 1930s, was conscious of the balance of power on an international
scale, and aware that the kind of global revolution Trotsky hoped for,
risked setting off a war which would be fatal for the revolutionaries.


The specificity of Stalinism is prudence in foreign policy, which
counterbalances the voluntarism and cruelty used in the programming
of internal transformation. Hence Stalin's cynical game of cat and
mouse with the democratic countries and Nazi Germany to escape
military conflict in the 1930s. “No” to war, unless it is imposed, as
was the case in the end between 1941 and 1945. “Yes” to revolution,
on the condition that it does not set off a war which may be lost. This
idea of peace is even orchestrated and transformed into ideology during
the Cold War through the formation of the peace movement, inspired
and dominated by militant communists, whose objective was to give


75


ROBERT FRANK


a negative, warlike image of the American adversary, and which spread
in the Europe which had been so devastated by world war. For the
fascist totalitarian regimes, war is the judgement of God, which must
prove the superiority of the Italian nation or of the German race. But
Soviet totalitarianism did not need to prove itself through war.
Although it aimed for world domination, the goal still lay far ahead,
without the risk of relentless pursuit of the twilight of the gods. The
proposed future was supposed to be radiant, more accessible to everyone,
peacefully more contagious, more exportable than the fascist future,
as it was made of “happiness”, “peace and "justice like a beautiful
dawn, idyllic and deadly. Communism, even Stalinist communism,
is supposed to feed on humanism and faith in progress, notions that
fascism rejects. This is why the great alliance between the Anglo-
Americans and the Soviets, certainly furthered by the German invasion
itself, became feasible. This is also why, after the break-up of this
alliance in 1947, the struggle of democratic countries against the USSR
was not open war. The balance of nuclear terror cannot explain
everything. Neither they nor the Soviets wanted a war they could not
integrate into their respective ideals, unlike fascist totalitarianism. The
two camps wanted victory by means other than war. One of the two
camps lost its wager.


OTHER DICTATORSHIPS OR AUTHORITARIAN REGIMES:
PRUDENCE AND DEFENCE OF FOREIGN POLICIES


The more traditional dictatorships are different from totalitarian
regimes, even if here or there they copy certain methods (certain rituals
relating to mass indoctrination). They do not necessarily want to create
a “new mankind” and, by this, do not assign themselves to a regional
or global mission. Their ambition is not to export their model, but to
solve their internal problems. They therefore need external peace, or
not to become involved in a world war. This was the case with Salazar
in Portugal, who did not refute the traditional links between his country
and Britain. Franco, tempted for a while after the fall of France to ask
Hitler for compensation from Morocco, understood very quickly that


76


POLITICAL REGIMES AND FOREIGN POLICIES: ATTITUDES TOWARDS WAR AND PEACE


he would obtain nothing at all, and fell back on a careful policy which
became even benevolent towards the Anglo-Americans from 1942
onwards. The Vichy regime collaborated with the German occupiers,
but on the condition that it would not be drawn into the war, which
in fact Hitler did not wish for either. The Latin American governments
committed themselves at different moments to the war against the
Axis powers and the Empire of the Rising Sun. Argentina, whether
led by Castillo, Ramirez or the Farrell-Peron team, refused to break
diplomatic and economic relations with Germany and Japan. But at
the last minute, on the $27^{th}$ of March 1945, it declared war on both
countries in order to be part of the future United Nations Organisation.
Dictatorships or authoritarian regimes lacking foreign ambition should
remain in the concert of nations and thus not perturb the international
order. The exceptions confirm the rule: when these regimes take this
risk, they lose out. Galtieri's takeover in the Falkland Islands (Malvinas)
in 1982, that he considered legal, was considered as an attack on
international law by the majority of the international community.
His defeat by Margaret Thatcher's Britain played a large part in the fall
of the Argentine dictator. The invasion of Kuwait by Saddam Hussein's
Iraq in 1990 was annulled by the Gulf War of 1991. It was only the
second war against Iraq in 2003 which put an end to the dictatorship
of the person threatening to undermine the international order. On
the other hand, the blows struck to the European order by Milosevic
led to the war in Kosovo, which he lost in 1999, and his defeat quickly
led to his demise.


NATIONAL DEMOCRACIES HAVE DIFFICULTY ESTABLISHING
AN INTERNATIONAL DEMOCRACY


DEMOCRATIC COUNTRIES TREAT DICTATORSHIPS DIFFERENTLY


For a long time, democratic countries did not fight against
dictatorships themselves. They even used them, when their national
interests seemed to demand it. During the twentieth century, they
attacked only those who disturbed regional or global order, and thus


77


ROBERT FRANK


international peace. This was obviously in accordance with their visions
of the world and of their own interests as victors after the two world
wars and the Cold War. But we must not restrict ourselves to this
narrow “realist” interpretation of events. There is more to think about.
Since the Munich syndrome, what is considered as a perturbation of
international peace, is not only a change in relation to a situation of
status quo, but also an attack which, if it remains unpunished, risks
provoking an undemocratic regional or global order from which we
could only escape at the cost of a longer and more expensive war. We
can therefore say that in the twentieth century, an international
democratic logic has been established, transcending the interests of
each democratic country.


Nor are the reactions to aggression from dictatorships the same.
They are proportionate to the dictatorial initiatives. The reaction to
the Nazi aggression towards Poland in 1939 or to the Japanese attack
on Pearl Harbour in December 1941, was in both cases open war,
which in fact took some time to take effect, and be efficient and
victorious. The reaction to non-war threats by the USSR between
1946 and 1948, was not open war but Cold War: the containment of
Soviet expansion through an ideological war, with the addition of an
economic weapon – America had the financial means of a Marshall
Plan which the Soviets did not – to preserve Western Europe, through
growth, from despair, starvation and chaos, all of which would favour
communist success. In Asia, the Cold War experienced open wars,
notably the Korean War, involving direct American military
intervention, endorsed by the UNO – which condemned the North
Korean attack on South Korea – but this case did not degenerate into
total war, because there was no direct intervention on the part of the
Soviets. The USSR also reacted with proportionate means. It knew
when to turn back in the face of the firmness of Western democracies,
whether in Berlin in 1949 or Cuba in 1962. The détente of the 1960s
came to an end with the renewal of a certain aggression on the part of
the Soviets at the end of the 1970s, this time involving direct military
intervention by the USSR in Afghanistan and the installing of


78


POLITICAL REGIMES AND FOREIGN POLICIES: ATTITUDES TOWARDS WAR AND PEACE


Euromissiles in Europe. Once again, the West did not react with open
war, but with the strategy of Cold War, which again featured the
firmness of democracies and the use of economic and ideological
weapons. This time with greater efficiency, as the United States had
wiped some of its slate clean after its departure from Vietnam, whilst
the image of direct aggression on the part of the USSR in Afghanistan
was added to the accumulation of negative images of Soviet tanks in
Budapest in 1956 and in Prague in 1968. In addition, the arms race
was renewed, to such an extent that the USSR's economy was soon
exhausted. In short, the strategy of the Cold War really was the
continuation of a policy of reaction by means other than open war, to
the benefit of democratic countries. It is really an illusion to try to
decide if we ought to consider the USSR as a state like any other in
international relations, or if we ought to take into account its
communist specificity. Both perceptions are certainly necessary: it is a
state like any other, whose rationality was based on national interest
and geopolitical considerations of security and power, to the extent
that it placed its ideological ambitions of communist victory in a long
term future (unlike Nazi totalitarianism). But because these ambitions
existed, and because communist ideology could distort its perceptions,
it is impossible to ignore the link between communism and Soviet
foreign policy.


At the time of the final crisis of the USSR, the Iraqi attack
against Kuwait was a provocation against the international democratic
order. It provoked open military intervention, supervised by democratic
countries. In fact, it was easier to take action against Saddam Hussein's
Iraq which did not have the strength of the former Soviet Union, or
of the present Russia, which acted almost freely in its repressive war in
Chetchenia Here, it was a case of direct and external aggression against
an internationally recognised state (Kuwait), and the UNO readily
supported the anti-Iraqi coalition. Again, we can identify the rules of
the game: it is the capacity for external pollution of dictatorships that
democracies seek to eliminate, and not their capacity for internal
pollution.


79


ROBERT FRANK


TURNING POINT: THE WARS IN YUGOSLAVIA


With the Yugoslav wars, especially the Bosnian war of 1992-
1995 and the war in Kosovo in 1999, an important turning point was
initiated. These wars were not only a counter-attack on the part of
democratic countries to external aggression, they also called on
democratic intervention. This is a new phenomenon. The mediatisation
of the massacres helped render public opinion in those democracies
more sensitive towards questions of human and humanitarian rights.
The international order was no longer felt as merely a necessity of
mechanical balance, but as an organic balance which internalises
democratic values. Furthermore, the necessity of intervention appears,
though we no longer know if it reacts to external or internal aggression,
as precisely, this necessity situates itself in a Yugoslavia which was in
the process of total disintegration. In 1994-1995, NATO, the armed
wing of democracies, helped the Muslims of Bosnia and their Croatian
allies against the Serbs of this same Bosnia. In 1999, the bombardments
by NATO and its allies against the Serbs of Serbia took place to put a
stop to the schemes of Milosevic in Kosovo, which was officially part
of this same Serbia. These interventions had the advantage of putting
an end to the ethnic massacres and threats of nationalist and belligenous
contagion in this part of Europe. And as far as the attack against
America of the $11^{th}$ of September 2001 is concerned, it was difficult
to identify the territorial origin immediately. When it became obvious
that the Afghanistan of the Talibans held some responsibility for
protecting Al Quaida, Bin Laden, and the originators of the attack,
war was declared by the United States in 2002, with the support of
democratic countries and the UNO. In all these recent conflicts, either
the UNO legitimised the action as it was taking place (as in the war
against Iraq in 1991, or against the Talibans of Afghanistan in 2002),
or, divided and powerless, it only legitimised it afterwards (Bosnia
and Kosovo), taking much of the responsibility in the reconstruction
and the stabilisation of the past-war situation. This a posteriori
legitimisation was facilitated by the fact that the democratic countries
stuck together and were unanimous.


80


POLITICAL REGIMES AND FOREIGN POLICIES: ATTITUDES TOWARDS WAR AND PEACE


The war in Iraq in 2003, essentially the result of American
unilateralism with which the British collaborated, is a different case.
Democratic countries were no longer unanimous in accepting this war,
and the legitimisation by the UNO was not achieved. It is still too
early today to say whether the unanimity of democratic countries will
be repeated within the context of post-Saddam Hussein Iraq, or
whether the UNO will have a role to play in Iraq's reconstruction.
But it is already easy to conclude that the democratic countries are
finding it difficult to install an international democracy, whereas they
believed it would come easily after the disintegration of the Soviet
Union, and thus the end of the anti-democratic superpower.


THE CONTRADICTION BETWEEN NATIONAL DEMOCRACIES
AND INTERNATIONAL DEMOCRACY


There are in fact several difficult contradictions to deal with.
Democratic countries have evolved since 1991, but communist China
still has its right of veto, as does Russia which, although having left
communism, does not necessarily agree with the Western democracies.
These same democracies also have their own contradictions. Democracy
expresses itself best within national space, and is precisely possible
because nations involved stick together and are coherent enough for
the minority to accept being governed by the majority, knowing in
fact that democratic alternation may one day give them the majority.
On the other hand, it expresses itself with greater difficulty within
international space, not only because all the member states of the
international community are not democracies, but because the
democratic countries themselves defend national democratic
sovereignties that they do not necessarily want to abandon to the benefit
of international democracy. The UNO reflects all these contradictions.
The result is a dilemma for democratic countries: either they look for
international democratic legitimacy through the UNO, but their action
risks being blocked within this divided and powerless authority; or
they bypass the UNO, and their intervention risks losing its
international legitimacy. From this point of view, something quasi


81


ROBERT FRANK


miraculous happens to the UNO: despite its structural weaknesses, it
appears as a necessary authority of legitimisation. This proves that a
very strong need for international democracy doesexist, which in the
long term even the top global power will have difficulty doing without.
The end of the contradiction between national democracies and
international democracy probably requires a reform of the UNO, and
of the right of veto.


Three brief conclusions can be made. First of all, the international
reality is too complex to fall into a single grid of interpretation. As we
have seen, those who carry out foreign policy have visions which are
both realist theories and theories which emphasise the influence of
ideology, including liberal theories. Historians may add that it is
necessary to integrate other explanation schemes: in particular the
“constructivist interpretation, according to which all reality is
constructed or reconstructed by its actors, and that international
relations are also the product of perceptions, right or wrong, of the
reality, by decision-makers. The result is that the foreign policy of
states concerns both national interest, or considerations which have
no relation to their institutions, as well as factors which are completely
inherent to their political regime. Secondly, it is obvious that an
international democratic logic has been taking shape and been reinforced
during the twentieth century. Democracies have gone to war against
authoritarian regimes, totalitarian regimes, and dictatorships, or, for
national and imperialist motives, against developing and undemocratic
countries. This statement seems to support the realist theory of
international relations, where a balance of power is necessary, rather
than relations based on law. Yet democratic countries have never gone
to war against each other (the military intervention in the Ruhr in
1923 was an exception, in that France did not then choose to see in
the Weimar Republic a democracy, preferring to see the face of an
eternal Germany). This statement supports the liberal theory. Already,
Kant, in his project for Perpetual Peace in 1795, predicted the end of
war with the generalisation of republican regimes, which would be
the victory of law against the arbitrary, and that law could overcome
force, even in the international sphere. More recently, Fukuyama


82


POLITICAL REGIMES AND FOREIGN POLICIES: ATTITUDES TOWARDS WAR AND PEACE


developed the same idea, attempting to predict the end of history
through the victory of democracies.


The third conclusion is precisely that the victory of democracies
does not automatically lead to international democracy or to the end
of history. To make the transition to this international democracy easier,
it is not enough to reflect on the relationships between national political
regimes and foreign policies; we must begin to conceive of a competent
political regime which would devote itself to the international
community, and to the organisations which represent it.


83


PART TWO


FOREIGN POLICY
AND


POLITICAL REGIME:


COMPARATIVE VIEWS AND DIVERSITY
OF THE EXPERIENCES


4


Fascism, FasCIST REGIMES AND
FOREIGN POLICIES


Didier Musiedlak


The first question before us is the definition of a fascist identity
that would make it possible to specify its foreign policy. This approach
implies the existence of fascism as a phenomenon with characteristics
perceptible in space and time. It also implies a certain type of concrete
experience of an objective political regime. One should not examine
here the theoretical aspects of generic fascism, which would mean
voiding it of all national substance. From this point of view one should
not also accept the idea that fascism is a phenomenon composed merely
of its ideological contents, from which it would be possible to extract
a presumably pure essence. 1


In consequence, it is convenient to limit ourselves to the most
important characteristics, that contemporary historians have traced in
order to better individualize this phenomenon. It is already accepted
that fascism was a product of the crisis resulting from the First
World War, although factors preceding the conflict have contributed
to its birth. In fact it was a new form of “revolutionary nationalism”
(E. Gentile) developed in Europe between the two world wars. This
revolutionary character is related to the importance of social
mobilization that affects particularly the open conflict of middle classes
with the existing establishment. The phenomenon starts with a
movement that creates a mass party under the guidance of a charismatic
leader. The new party has a special culture, rituals, a liturgy dedicated


1 S.G. Payne, A History of Fascism 1914-1945, Madison, Wisconsin, 1995; Juan J. Linz,
Totalitarian and Authoritarian Regimes, Boulder, Lynne Rienner Publishers, 2000; R. De
Felice, Il Fascismo: Le Interpretazioni dei Contemporanei e degli Storici, preface of G. Sabbatucci,
Bari, Lateza, 1998; E. Gentile, Fascismo: Storia e Interpretazione, Bari, Laterza, 2002.


87


DIDIER MUSIEDLAK


to the national honor. The second stage is the conquest of power, with
the transformation of the movement in a partisan State governed by a
dictatorship resorting to mass repression. Mobilization of the people
and politization of civil society are the chief characteristic of the new
regime, having as a corollary the clearly stated will to create a new
man. Under this totalitary dimension, the phenomenon could be be
taken as the way of authoritative regimes making use of mass
mobilization.


Therefore the present study concentrates on revolutionary
fascism, and in order to better illustrate its peculiar innovations it
focuses the Italian and the German experiences. As a matter of fact
these two nations have lived a domestic project aiming at the creation
of a new ruling class devoted to the regeneration of the country. From
this perspective, it is interesting to show the external emanations of
these policies and measure the degree of synchronization between
domestic and external objectives.


THE MAKING OF FOREIGN POLICY


The central question of political decision in the field of foreign
policy shows important aspects of the strategy of institucional
subversion used by fascism.2


Upon their conquest of power, both Mussolini and Hitler had
to adjust themselves to the existing institutions. The two dictators felt
that they had conducted a Legal Revolution. This concept, which was
not clearly perceived by their contemporaries, or later by historians,
meant simply that the revolution should be made within the institutional
framework that already existed, without any apparent rupture, although
in both cases these frameworks were liable to be changed.


2 On this question see E. Gentile, La Via Italiana al Totalitarismo: Il Partito e lo Stato nel
Regime Fascista, Roma, Nis, 1995; D. Musiedlak, Lo Stato Fascista e la sua Classe Politica
1922-1943, Bologna, Il Mulino, 2003; M. Broszat, Der Staat Hitlers: Grundlegung und
Entwicklung seiner Inneren Verfassung, München, 1989; K. D. Bracher, M. Funke, H.H.
Jacobsen, Deutschland 1933-1945: Neue Studien zur Nationalsozialistischen Herrschaft, Bonn,
Droste, 1992.


88


FASCISM, FASCIST REGIMES AND FOREIGN POLICIES


Italy's constitution was the original one from Piemonte; dated
of 1848, as the 1861 “Unity Constitution it was extended to the
whole country. Italy was a liberal monarchy with two Chambers of
representatives: the High Chamber, or Senate, with members
nominated for life, and a second Chamber which only after 1912 was
composed by universal suffrage. In theory King Vittorio Emmanuele
III had very extended powers, but since the beginning of the century
he had renounced many of his prerogatives in favor of the Minister
who occupied the Presidency of the Council.


In the case of Germany, the Weimar Republic founded in 1918
was based on a negotiated agreement. The Constituents had chosen a
strong Executive to avoid the risks of revolution and separatism. The
President of the Republic was elected by universal suffrage and,
according to Article 48 of the Constitution, had full powers to act in
case of serious troubles. Legislative Power was assumed jointly by the
Reichsrat (the assembly of German States) and the Reichstag (elected
under universal suffrage, which after the war was extended to both
sexes). The two constitutions were susceptible to possible authoritarian
derivations. According to the Statuto, the Italian Constitution could
be changed by a simple law. Considered as just an ordinary law, it was
subject to revision without any special procedure. This malleability
had made possible the unification of the country without any difficulty,
but it presented serious dangers in the hypothesis of too strong an
Executive Power.


The strength of Mussolini was precisely his understanding that
being the master of the Executive made it possible for him to change
institutions, provided that the image of a certain continuity could be
maintained. The way to proceed was clear: the upkeep of the monarchy
as well as the conditions of access to power dictated the spirit of his
program of conquests that had to be gradual, so as to respect the feelings
of the old liberal elite.


In Germany, the Weimar constitution was marked by the
Prussian syndrome of authority (Obrigkeit). In fact, however, all
depended on the President's attitude vis à vis the respect of existing
institutions. The 1925 election of Hindenburg, after the death of


89


DIDIER MUSIEDLAK


Friedrich Ebert, was the first authoritarian inflexion. The political crisis
opened with the great depression increased the pace of this evolution.
Nominated President of the Council by King Vittorio Emmanuele,
in November-December 1922, Mussolini received full powers from
both Chambers. Hitler was made Chancellor on January $30^{th}$. 1933,
in a perfectly legal manner. In this context, the only way opened was a
regime of cooperation between the new and the old elites. In Germany,
the system was regulated by the duality: Party bureaucracy
(Parteibürokratie) and State bureaucracy (Staatsbürokratie).3 The
complexity of the system was in part solved by the personalization of
the two hierarchies: Hitler was the Führer and the Chancellor of the
Reich; Herman Göring, the Minister President of Prussia and Delegate
in charge of the four-year plan. However, in practical terms the regime
could not work without the old elite.4 In Italy, this mechanism of
double administration was also outlined. According to a 1925 law
Mussolini was the Duce del Fascismo and Capo del Governo; since
the 1930's the PNF Secretary had the status of Minister.


The next step was undoubtedly the most difficult. After
neutralizing the old elite, during this period of active cooperation, the
system should lead to a more radical second phase characterized by the
emergence of a new partisan elite and the eradication of the traditional
elite.5 However, notwithstanding the efforts to that effect, the second
phase remained incomplete.


Within this structure the State was subjected to a “continued
revolution . Since the Machtergreifung, the Weimar Constitution was
mutilated (with the suppression of the Reichsrat), but not entirely
suppressed. The Italian constitution remained untouched. This apparent
lack of mobility in the two countries hid in fact a practice of subversion


3 W. Zapf, "Die Verwalter der Macht : Materialen zum Sozialprofil der Höheren Beamtenschafť ,
in ders (Hrsg), Beiträge zur Analyse der Deutschen Obserschicht, Piper Verlag, München,
1965, p.78.


4 H. Mommsen, Beamtentum im Dritten Reich, Deutsche Verlags-Anstalt GMBH, Stuttgart,
1966,  . 14.


5 M. Kater, The Nazi Party : A Social Profile of Members and Leaders, 1919-1945, Blackwell,
Oxford, 1983, p. 238.


90


FASCISM, FASCIST REGIMES AND FOREIGN POLICIES


more dangerous because it was not so visible. In his 1941 book The
Dual State E. Fraenkel had defined it in large lines. The task implied
the gradual transformation of the political class in the context of
 the normative State , operating within the double State under a
dictatorship. 6 Behind the façade of the traditional State a new partisan
State was formed, to act as a phagocyter of the old structure.
Diplomacy was not outside this process. The tactics used by the two
regimes was the enfeeblement of both of Palazzo Chigi and
Wilhelmstrasse, to guarantee in due time their full conformity.7


For a long time the Italian diplomatic institution had depended
on the Savoie monarchy. During the Giolitti period (1901-1914) the
Presidency of the Council had begun to obtain some degree of
autonomy, but the strength of the Minister of Foreign Affairs remained
intact. Diplomacy, as well as the army, remained generally an attribute
of the old aristocratic elite.


In this respect Germany presented a similar profile, with the
maintenance at Wilhemstrasse of the structures inherited from the
Empire. Versailles was debited to the politicians, and not to the
diplomats. Before Hitler assumed power, the diplomats at
Wilhelmstrasse, including von Neurath, the Minister of Foreign Affairs,
had felt how the burden of political responsibility related to the
Versailles Treaty was an irretrievable damage. The Weimar Republic
had failed also in its attempt to integrate the military, despite the efforts
of Groener in the beginning of the years 1920 to promote a pacifist
revisionism with the Western powers. Hitler benefited therefore from
a favourable conjuncture in the old elite, due to the repulsion it felt
for the Weimar Republic. The Führer accepted without difficulty the


6 According to E. Fraenkel, the Totalitarian State is characterized by its duplicity. He
distinguishes the "Prerogative State", defined by resorting to violence and arbitrariness
from the "Normative State" that obeys administrative rules and insures the execution and
the legal cover of operations. Cf. E. Fraenkel, The Dual State: A Contribution to the Theory of
Dictatorship, Octagon Books, New York (copyright 1941), reprinted 1939, p. 13. On the
pertinence of Fraenkel analyses of Italian fascism see P. Pombeni, Demagogia e Tirannide:
Uno Studio sulla Forma-partito del Fascismo, Bologna, Il Mulino, 1984,  . 447-9.


7 A. A. Kallis, Fascist Ideology: Territory and Expansionism in Italy and Germany, 1922-1945,
London, Routledge, 2000, p. 61.


91


DIDIER MUSIEDLAK


maintenance of von Neurath, imposed by Hindenburg. Until his death,
in 1934, the old Marshall had full powers in the field of foreign affairs
as well as in military matters.


In both cases this phase of cooperation with the old elite
coincided with a gradual policy aiming at the consolidation of the
pesonal power of the two dictators. For Mussolini this happened with
the law of December 25, 1925 regulating the functions of the head of
government, Capo del governo, key of the strong state. Before that
Mussolini was Minister of Foreign Affairs ad interim, situation that
continuted until June $17^{th}$ 1924, when he took charge officially of
the Ministry, until 1929. The law regulating the functions of Capo del
Governo allowed him to surmount the resistance opposed by the
Carrière. In January 1926 Il Duce succeeded in increasing his
competence accumulating the functions of Prime Minister, Minister
of Foreign Affairs, Minister of War, Minister of the Navy and of the
Air Force. Reinforced in his position, he could dispense the services of
Salvatore Contarini, who until that date was Secretary General and
Director General of the Ministry of Foreign Relations (December
31 1919  April 6 1926). After some time the post of Secretary
General was officially discontinued (August 25 1932). But Mussolini's
offensive did not stop there. The diplomatic and consular career was
reformed (June 2 1927), and its personnel renewed. Furthermore, to
counterbalance the King's authority over the army, in June 6 1925
Mussolini created the post of Head of the Army General Staff. The
access to the function of High Command was completed on the $6^{th}$
of February 1927. The last important institutional offensive in this
field happened later, when Mussolini received the title of Marshall of
the Empire (March 30, 1938), a measure that could not escape anybody's
attention. It represented another abatement of the monarchical
authority, and allowed Mussolini to fulfil his deficit of legitimacy,
comparatively to Adolf Hitler, who on the $4^{th}$. February 1938 was


8 Salvatore Contarini had entered the PNF on March 3rd. 1926. According to Raffaele Guariglia,
during this period all the members of Italian diplomacy were subjected to the Party. See
R. Guariglia, Ricordi 1922-1946, Napoli, Edizioni Scientifiche Italiane, 1949, p. 53.


92


FASCISM, FASCIST REGIMES AND FOREIGN POLICIES


made Commander of all the Armed Forces of the Reich. 9 The process
of “domestication of the old ruling class had started in the beginning
of the 1930's, and the Duce could now act as the lord of the state,
counting with the support of the army, in the context of his respect
for a certain autonomy of the military. 10


In Germany, the entente with the old bureaucracy was
maintained at least until 1938, as a façade. The mistrust expressed by
Hitler was close to contempt, and in private he would say that the
Auswärtiges Amt was nothing but “an accumulation of debris of
intelligence". 11 The progressive acceptance of a radical revisionism by
the representatives of the old German elite, as von Neurath (in
diplomacy) and von Blomberg, was the cement of this acceptance.
However, despite this agreement in principle, Hitler tried to consolidate
his personal position in the centre of the Constitution of the Führerstaat
developed after the death of Hindenburg in August 1934. In this
way he was able to assimilate all the prerogatives of the presidential
function.


The reinforcement of Hitler's personal position assumed the
form of an authentic constellation of "parallel organs". Since the
beginning Hitler stimulated the creation of new structures within the
nazi party, like the Aussenpolitisches Amt, led by Alfred Rosenberg who
became in a way the nazi expert in matters of foreign policy. To
strenghten ties between the party and German expatriates, the creation
of the Auslandsorganisation (AO) had the effect of doubling
institutional diplomacy. This organization was the equivalent of the
Italian fasci all' Estero, whose secretary (Giuseppe Bastianini) until 1926
was a member of the Fascist Grand Council. In the beginning of the
1930's the Fasci all'Estero were inserted into the Ministry of Foreign


9 On Mussolini's power deficit in his interventions in military matters, due to the Germans,
see H. von Kotze, Heeresadjutant bei Hitler 1938-1943: Aufzeichnungen des Majors Engel,
DVA, Stuttgart, 1974, p. 98.


10 McGregor Knox, Mussolini Unleashed, 1939-1941 : Politics and Strategy in Fascist Italy's
Last War, Cambridge University Press, 1982, p. 15.


11 K. Hildebrand, Das Vergangene Reich: Deutsche Aussenpolitik von Bismarck bis Hitler, DVA,
Stuttgart, 1995,  . 583.


93


DIDIER MUSIEDLAK


Affairs, the Affari Esteri (Direzione Generale Italiani all'Estero e Scuole).12
Like Mussolini, Hitler chose to use a personal diplomacy, with his
own emissaries: von Papen in Austria, Göring for relations with Italy,
Spain and the nazi party of Dantzig, later Ribbentrop for relations
with London and the Sudeten party.


The proliferation of competing agencies made it possible for
Hitler to dilute the traditional diplomatic institutions, increasing at
the same time his own authority, as he assumed the position of arbiter
in institutional conflicts. The von Neurath opposition to the nomination
of Ribbentrop as Secretary of State at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
in 1937, the hostility of Goebbels towards Ribbentrop with respect
of the information arriving from other countries are illustrations of
these tensions that disturbed the conduction of German diplomacy.
The understanding between the army and the nazi authorities was
maintained until 1937, based on the common attitude of revisionism.
Hitler had accepted the purge of the SA, and the real competition
occurred later on, with the SS.


The last phase was characterized by the imposition of conformity
to diplomacy and the army during the 1938 crisis, when revisionism
led to war. On the $5^{th}$. February 1938 Ribbentrop took the place of
Neurath, Blomberg was substituted by Werner von Brauchitsch as the
new Commander in Chief of the armed forces, and Wilhelm Keitel
foi made the chief of a new organization within Wehrmacht (OKW).13


Thus, gradually Mussolini and Hitler succeeded in appropriating
the decision making process in foreign policy, increasing their personal
participation in such decicions at the cost of the traditional State structures.
The second factor related to the identity of the fascist regime is
associated with the ideological manipulation of the power policy
desired by the two regimes.


12 E. Franzina, M. Sanfilippo, Il Fascismo e gli Emigrati: La Parabola dei Fasci Italiani all'Estero
(1920-1943), Bari, Laterza, 2003,  . 3.


13 On the consequences of the crisis Blomberg-Fritsch, in January-February 1938, and its
effects on the external and internal consolidation of Hitler's position, see K. Hildebrand,
Das Vergangene Reich, op. cit., p. 644-5.


94


FASCISM, FASCIST REGIMES AND FOREIGN POLICIES


IDEOLOGY AND VALUES


Fascist and nazi thinking did not exhibit a spirit of system that
could be compared with those of Marx or Hegel. More than an
ideology stricto sensu, it proposed a certain relationship with the world.
Facing the rational universe of bourgeoisie, fascist thinking preached
the brutal force of being, glorified of the power of élan vital, the
triumph of the body and energy. Mussolini thought that the whole
culture was included in the same life cycle that gave it a meaning.
According to Georges Mehlis, a German who had lived in Italy in the
1920's, this was the essence of fascism. Mussolini and his doctrine
were related to the greatest cultural phenomenon of modern times
(Kulturerscheinung der Gegenwart).14 Beyond the differences between
the two concepts there was the same principle: life, the source of
everything, existed in the interior of a culture defined as a living
organism. To resort to the formulation used by Spengler in his Decline
of the West, cultured man receives his energy from his own interior,
whereas civilized man does it from the exterior. 15 Therefore imperialism
was associated to aggressiveness, understood as a natural aspect of
Western man. As Mussolini himself expressed it to the Italian Senate
on the 28th. May 1926, “every living being must have an imperialist
nature and in this context the imperialism of the Italian people was a
normal phenomenon, apropriate to a power such as Italy. An analogous
proposition was advanced by Adolf Hitler in a speech made in Erlangen
on November $13^{th}$. 1930: “All beings tend to expand, and every people
tends to rule the world”.16 Related to the cycle of life, the world of
culture was also exposed to decay. For Niezsche this was a phenomenon
entirely natural, and consequently unavoidable. The famous formula
extracted from the fragment dated of Spring 1888 stated: “Man makes
no progress".


14 G. Mehlis, Die Idee Mussolinis und der Sinn des Faschismus, Leipzig, Verlag E. Haberland,
1928, p. 16. This book had been translated into Italian in 1930.


15 D. Pelken, Oswald Spengler: Konservativer Denker zwischen Kaiserreich und Diktatur,


München, Verlag Beck, 1988, p. 51.


16 K. Hildebrand, Das Vergangene Reich, op. cit., p. 574.


95


DIDIER MUSIEDLAK


In this way the imperialist nature of Man led naturally to the
imperialism of peoples. The notion of territorial conquest was therefore
one key element to understand the nature of fascist politics, and at the
same time an instrument to work on the regeneration of man.


Fascist and nazi imperialisms had a different stand on many
points, although a central element of both conceptions was the
reconstitution of empire. In the case of Italy, this imperialism would
manifest itself in the Mediterranean area. To Hitler, since the beginning
the will to expand was implied in his concept of race and space. 17 The
themes of Hitler policies had been developed since 1925/6 in Mein
Kampf, and later in the unpublished Second Book (Zweites Buch),
written in 1928. The main idea is quite simple: Germany could only
exist as a major power. The notion of a vast autarchic space had been
proposed by Ludendorff in 1918 but the new fact was its basis on a
racial dogma, what signified a clear rupture with the Kaiser imperialism.
The policy of conquest of “vital room” was compared to the struggle
of the Aryans to survive over their enemies, particularly the jews,
considered the main antagonists (Hauptfeind). As agents of modernity
and bearers of universal modernity, jews were presented as destroyers
of the Kultur, understood in the ethnological sense. Only the formation
of a racial empire, beginning with the organization of this “vital space”,
could guarantee the future of the Aryan race. Such a policy led initially
to the purification of the national community, cleaning it of their
domestic enemies (jews, communists, democrats), but the complete
reconstruction of Aryan power implied also the total destruction of
the enemy, once the vital space was liberated. According to one of
Hitler's sayings, heard in his hearquarters, his intention was to strike
Europe in order to produce “a considerable torrent of blood”
(K. Hildebrand). Soon after his ascent to power, on February 3rd.
1933, Hitler mentioned clearly to the representatives of the army that
his chief option was the “Lebensraum-Politik".


17 On the racial dogma and its implications see K. Hildebrand, Deutsche Aussenpolitik
1933-1945: Kalkül oder Dogma?, Stuttgart, Kohlhammer, 1990, p. 138.; H. Gramml,
Rassismus und Lebensraum: Völkermord im Zweiten Weltkrieg, In: K. D. Bracher, M.
Funke, H. A.Jacobsen, Deutschland 1933-1945, op. cit., p. 440-51.


96


FASCISM, FASCIST REGIMES AND FOREIGN POLICIES


In the spirit of Mussolini the formation of the empire was equally
a means to conjure decadence, but such restauration was not understood
in a racial sense. Since the end of the 1920's Mussolini had been seduced
by the ideas of Spengler on the demographic weakness of the West.
Spengler's conception of race, giving precedence to culture, supported
his own views. 18 According to the very words used by Spengler in
Jahre der Entscheidung (August 1933), race was, to begin with, an
ethos without any relation to the conceptions prevailing at the time.
Like Spengler, and differently from the nazis, Mussolini thought that
it was impossible to go back and find an unity of race in the biological
sense, due to the mixing of populations. However, more affirmatively
than Spengler, he believed that it was possible to change the individual
according to the fascist conception. Since 1928 G. Mehlis had
perceived that this reflexion on people and race was one of the more
important factors of the fascist ethics and its system of values, stressing
at the same time the inovative character of this dictatorship. 19 To
preserve the cultural identity of Western man such operation could
only be accepted at the scale of the “white race”. Mussolini avoided
thus the ethnic and racial conceptions of the nazis, rejected by
Spengler. 20 Race was perceived in a voluntarist perspective, that valued
the spiritual dimension in an European context. Along these lines,
Italy, with her model of a “new Man”, was showing the way to the
other Western peoples. The experience of fascist regeneration presented
to the Western peoples the possibility not only of guaranteeing their
survival but to transcend themselves. Mussolini was particularly
interested in the passages about the White Revolution that made up
the second theme of Years of the Decision (Jahre der Entscheidung) and
the effective field of the struggle. The subject was the “vertical” combat
on behalf of the “white layers”, the most qualified of each nation,


18 R. de Felice, Mussolini il Duce: Gli Anni del Consenso, 1929-1936, Torino, Einaudi, 1974,
p. 38.


19 G.Mehlis, Die Idee Mussolinis, op. cit., p. 83-4.


20 On this point see the conclusions of G. Mosse. In: L'Uomo e le Masse nelle Ideologie
Nazionaliste, Bari, Laterza, 1988, p. 245. However, this author refused De Felice's point of
view that Fascism was a prolongation of Iluminist philosophy.


97


DIDIER MUSIEDLAK


against the inferior elements. In an article published by the newspaper
Il Popolo d'Italia (15th December 1933), Mussolini proclaimed a
genuine mobilization in favor of the white race, whose existence was
seen as endangered. As Mussolini confided to Ciano, revolution should
"influence the customs of the Italians” so that in the long term they
could become “masters”.21 The work of Spengler supported also the
personal options of Mussolini in racial policy. Today, Mussolini's racism
can not be ignored, although at least until September 1938 the jews
had an low standing in the hierarchy of his enemies.


With such values, in the theoretical level war remained at the
center of this structure, both from an internal and external perspective,
with precedence given to the figure of the enemy. War was one of the
elements of the campaign for the regeneration of the New Man. Since
the mid-1930's it was seen as the decisive concept. In 1935 Eric
Ludendorff publishes The Total War (Der Totale Krieg, München, 1935).
Two years later, Karl Schmitt synthetizes the idea of total war in his
essay “Total Enemy, Total War, Total State” (1937).


In Italy as in Germany, these ideological conceptions were applied
gradually in order to promote the respective empires.


THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A FASCIST POLICY


The foreign policy of the two countries responded to several
inflexions in function of the degree of ideological cohesion presented
by the two regimes. From this angle one might say that this succession
of changes has been more pronounced in fascist Italy than in nazi
Germany. Notwithstanding these differences, it is possible to distinguish
different phases in the evolution of the foreign policy of the two
countries.


The first phase corresponds to the internal consolidation of the
two dictatorships and the deformation of the instruments governing
external policy. For Italy, this phase of consolidation is often described


21 G. Ciano, Journal Politique, 1937-1938, Paris: Les Editions de Paris, 1949, p. 219, July
10th. 1938.


98


FASCISM, FASCIST REGIMES AND FOREIGN POLICIES


as one of "good behaviour”.22 The country moves essentially within a
general context sufficiently close to traditional diplomacy: the League
of Nations and the alliance between France and England. On the 27th
November 1922 Mussolini disclosed his general philosophy. These
policies did not exclude imperialism, but gave it a reasoned substance
that did not forbid the use of force. Such preservation of the national
interest was based on a dialog with the Western powers. Within this
spirit, Mussolini contributed to the détente signing the Locarno Pact
(December 1925) and the Briand Kellogg Pact (August 1928) on the
renunciation of the use of force. This phase is marked equally by a
rapprochement with England, to a large extent facilitated by the
personal relations of Austen Chamberlain (British Minister of Foreign
Affairs 1924-9), Winston Churchill and the Duce. The consequence
was the image of responsible statesman that Mussolini succeeded in
projecting in Europe during this period.


However, this position did not correspond fully to the Italian
political situation. The occupation of Corfu, in 1923, after the killing
of the Italian delegates of SDN, did not count with a previous
consultation between Mussolini and Salvatore Contarini. But
international public opinion saw it as a simple incident, and not as the
sign of a new policy, although there were several facts pointing to this.
In March 1925, Mussoli decided to take over Albania. Since 1924 the
Duce had prepared an attack on Turkey, 23 but the consequences of the
Matteotti affair and the mobilization called for by K. Atatürk made
him interrupt the military preparations in Naples bay. The fact is that
in the 1920's Italy had not renounced her imperialist intentions, but
the infiltration policy remained peaceful, respecting the agreements
with Roumania, Greece and Hungary, and particulary the position of
the diplomatic “old guard that refused to cooperate with such


22 On the foreign policy of Italy see E. Di Nolfo, Mussolini e la Politica Estera Italiana
1919-1933, Padova, Cedam, 196; E. Aga-Rossi, La Politica Estera e l'Impero, In: Storia
d'Italia (G. Sabbatucci and V. Vidotto) Guerre e Fascismo, 4, Bari, Laterza, 1997, p. 245-303;
R.J.B. Bosworth, S. Romano, La Politica Estera Italiana 1860-1985, Bologna, Il Mulino, 1991.
23 A. Kallis, Territory and Expansionism, op. cit., p. 69.


99


DIDIER MUSIEDLAK


adventures. The treaty of friendship with Iugoslavia and the agreement
on Fiume (1924) were a result of this policy. Since the consolidation
of his personal power, in 1925, and the departure of Salvatore
Contarini, in 1926, fascist policies began to change without a rupture
of relations with the Western powers. Military expenditures rose from
2,6% a year, in 1923-25, to 3, 4 % in 1927, and then to 5,4 % in
1931. According to MacGregor Knox, between 1926 and 1940 Italy
spent proportionately more in this area than England. The nomination
of Dino Grandi as Under-Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, in
1925, and then as Minister, in 1929, accentuated this impression of
change. The new minister tried to limit the initiatives of the several
departments of the Ministry, concentrating the decision making
process. As a matter of fact, during this period Grandi, who was not
very active in Party activities, attempted to transform Italy in the arbiter
of the international system, following his so-called policy of “decisive
weight", that flattered the Duce, freed now from the domestic limits
after the Latran agreements with the Holy See. The opposition of
Grandi to Germany, the most important project of Mussolini in foreign
policy, as well as his policy in favor of disarmament, were the source
of his disgrace (July 1932).


In the case of Hitler, the phase of personal consolidation created
less conflict on the objectives of foreign policy, as the new and the old
elites agreed with the policy of national uplift and revision of the
Versailles Treaty.


Between 1934 and 1936, military questions occupied the scene.
The rearmament program had been started in 1933 under the authority
of General Ludwig Beck, head of the Army General Staff. He had
evoked the need to reinstate recruitment due to the risk of a preventive
war against Germany. According to Blomberg, the remilitarisation of
the Rheinland was also seen as a defense against a possible French attack.
The incorporation of Austria and of the Sudeten was part of the
formation of a large power at the center of the continent: a strong
desire of the old elite. In this sense there was a certain agreement between
the army and the nazi leaders. For this reason the conference of Hossbach


100


FASCISM, FASCIST REGIMES AND FOREIGN POLICIES


of November 1937 on the regime expansionist plans carried no surprises
for the participants (Neurath, Werner von Blomberg, Werner von
Fritsch, Erich Raeder e Herman Göring). But this was a subtle game.
Behind the apparent consensus there was a genuine struggle between
rival groups to control the information supplied to the Führer. 24 The
old elites favored policies more flexible than those practiced by the
nazis. It was a problem more of method than of essential opposition.
Participants of the affair of the recruitment, in 1935, were not so
much Blomberg (Defense Minister) or Neurath (Minister of Foreign
Affairs) but Ribbentrop. And it was Ribbentrop who promoted the
entente between Italy and Japan in 1936, while Neurath was afraid of
the anti-British implications of such an agreement.


The adoption of a fascist policy expressing the ideology
prevailing in both countries happened in the decade of 1930. That
dimension was for a long time denied to Italy, due to the importance
of the tradition of Gaetano Salvemini that limited fascist policies to a
simple posture of opportunism.25 According to the interpretation of
Giorgio Rochat, this posture was not based on a grand design, but
essentially a series of “improvised and contradictory decisions born
from propaganda and rhetoric. The position defended par Renzo De
Felice consisted in saying that fascist policies, at least until the Spanish
War, could be related to the preservation of national interests without
any ideological originality. In paralel with this minimalist current, in
function of the internal revaluation made during these last years in the
working of the regime, other specialists have emphasized the density
and coherence of the fascist project with the aim of creating a veritable
empire on the Mediterranean. According to them the pressure exerted
by Italy in this region was strong enough to generate a process of
destabilization, to the point of being one of the most important factors
of the Second World War.


24 Z. Shore, What Hitler Knew: The Battle for Information in Nazi Foreign Policy, Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2003, p. 122.


25 M. Knox, Il Fascismo e la Politica Estera Italiana, In: R. J. B. Bosworth, S. Romano,
La Politica Estera Italiana, op. cit., p. 290.


101


DIDIER MUSIEDLAK


To Italy this moment corresponded to the war of Ethiopia
(1935), because that conflict changed the play of alliances due to the
sanctions imposed by the democratic governments but also because of
the type of war involved. The mobilization had as a corollary a vast
process of destruction of the colonial populations. The use of
deportation and the concentration camps (fifteen of them were built
hastily in 1930 in the desertic region of Sirtica, in Cyrenaica), gas
employed in large scale as a means of conquest in Libya but particularly
in Ethiopia, the “exploits” of squadristas roaming freely the streets of
Addis Abbeba after the attack against Graziani (February 19-21 1937),
the codification of a form of apartheid on the $30^{th}$. December 1937
witnessed that there was now a new kind of war with a racial
significance. 26


The International conjuncture of 1936 and the Axis Rome-
Berlin prolonged by the Pact of Steel in 1939 contributed to forge a
common identity, admitted in 1940/1. The Spanish Civil War promoted
this ideological front under Galeazzo Ciano, que new Minister of
Foreign Affairs, who was the advocate of a rapprochement with nazi
Germany. His action was decisive in the process of reinforcement of
the structure of his power in the diplomatic institution.27 It contributed
also to accelerate the process of concentration and personalisation of
the Duce intervention the field of diplomatic decision. General Roatta,
at the head of SIM Servizio Informazioni Militare (secret service) was
put in charge of rationalizing Italian action in Spain.


In Germany, the organization Ausland (AO) of the nazi party
had an important role; the opposition of Neurath to the war contributed
to disqualify him, and this represented a gain for Ribbentrop and
Göring.


The last period occurred after 1939-40, with the beginning of
the Second World War, bringing the triumph of Utopy with the myth


26 A. Del Boca, Le Guerre del Fascismo, Bari, Laterza, 1995; A. Sbacchi, Legacy of Bitterness:
Ethiopia and Fascist Italy, 1935-1941, Lawrenceville, 1997.


27 F. Gilbert, Ciano and his Ambassadors, In: G. A. Craig, F. Gilbert, The Diplomats
1919-1939, Princeton: p. 512-36.


102


FASCISM, FASCIST REGIMES AND FOREIGN POLICIES


of imperial restauration. In 1940 Mussolini chose again an expansionist
policy, not for the preservation of internal order or for economic
reasons, but to keep up his position in Hitler's Europe. 28 The country
lived a remake of what G. Procacci defined as the “symbol of Crimea”,
alluding to the tactic options of Cavour in 1855.29 This effect was
felt a second time when Antonio Salandra forced the country into the
war, in May 1915. In 1940, the logic was the same. Italy should be
present at the war to win a territorial prize at the moment of negotiation.
Thus, the “parallel war” of Mussolini was a prolongation of the  sacred
egoism" of 1915. The fulgurant success of the German army in
Norway, The Netherlands and France dismissed the fear of Mussolini
who, on the 10th. of June 1940, accepted the engagement with the
German ally to make a war he expected to be short and very lucrative
for his country. In war the Duce saw the possibility of transforming
in reality his dream of unifying under his authority the whole
Mediterranean basin. 30 Such a project had also the objective of
founding a new political order reflecting the fascist ideal. The loss of
Tunis and the invasion of Sicily sounded the knell of this grand design.
On the $25^{th}$. July 1943 the Fascist Grand Council deposed the Duce,
learning the lesson of his political adventure.


To Germany the rupture came during the year 1938, after the
occupation of the Sudeten, when the “irredentist” program was
completed. A new phase started with the utilization of the Einsätzgruppen
to exterminate “Czecoslovak elements considered irretrievable. 31
Germany adopted the logic of European conquest. After the attack
against Prague (Der Griff nach Prag, March 15th 1939), came the
aggression of Poland (September $3^{rd}.$), decisive for the conquest of


28 MacGregor Knox, Mussolini Unleashed: Politics and Strategy in Fascist Italy's Last War,
Cambridge University Press, 1982, p. 289.


29 G. Procacci, L'Italia nella Grande Guerra, In: Storia d'Italia (G. Sabbatucci and V. Vidotto),
4, Guerre e Fascismo, Laterza, Bari, 1997, p. 15.


30 R. M. Salerno, Vital Crossroads: Mediterranean Origins of the Second World War,
1935-1940, Ithaca and London, 2002, p. 216.


31 W. Benz, H. Gramml, H.Heiss, Enzyklopädie des Nationalsozialismus, München, DTV,
1997,  . 440.


103


DIDIER MUSIEDLAK


Lebensraum. From that point onwards war has shown the double aspect
that it would maintain until the end: on the Western front a classic war
against France, a demonstration of German power (Grossmachtpolitik);
on the East a new type of war, conceived as the destruction of local
populations (O. Bartov, U. Herbert). But it was too early for the
realization of the vast continental empire that Hitler since 1933 had
projected. In 1940, he found himself in the situation which he expected
for 1943.32 At mid-September 1940, the Führer seemed to accept
provisionally the temporary solution proposed by Ribbentrop: a
continental bloc joining Germany, Italy, Japan and the Soviet Union,
with the possible inclusion of Spain and the Vichy regime. 33 Only
after the failure of Molotov visit to Berlin, in November 1940, the
decision to invade the Soviet Union was formally taken. In June
Operation Barbarossa, planned for March 1941, was posponed due
to the enlargement of the Balkans campaign. Hitler was now engaged
in fighting his war, a genuine cruzade against bolchevism, a war
conceived also as a racial conflict to destroy the enemy “jew-bolshevik”.
At the beginning of Operation Barbarossa Hitler counted with the
support of the whole national structure, army plus ministry of foreign
affairs, that accepted not only his program of conquest but also the
policy of mass destruction of entire populations.


No doubt there is a certain proximity in terms of identity
between Italian fascism and German nazism, based on their
expansionist logic in foreign policy, that tended to reflect the ideological
options of the two regimes, and became in time and according to
their respective modalities one of the mechanisms of the totalitarian
State tuned on a certain type of war and domination. Due to this
growing homology of domestic and external policies, it may seem
legitimate to question the pertinency of separating these two spheres,
internal and external, as both were at the service of the same project.


32 A. Hillgruber, Hitlers Strategie: Politik und Kriegführung, 1940-41, München, 1982.
33 W. Michalka, Ribbentrop und die Deutsch Weltpolitik 1933-1940: Aussenpolitische Konzeption
und im Dritten Reich Entscheidungsprozesse, München, 1980.


104


5


IN SEARCH OF A CAUSAL NEXUS BETWEEN
POLITICAL REGIMES AND FOREIGN POLICY
STRATEGIES IN THE POST-SOVIET ENVIRONMENT


Vladimir Kulagin


A brief overview of the post-Soviet political terrain in recent
years produces a rather puzzling picture. One can register almost
universal and at least demonstrative pro-Western trajectories in the
foreign policies of the majority of the new independent states (Belarus
and formally neutral Turkmenistan being the only exceptions). As
regards the Baltic states (Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania) the process of
the foreign policy alignment with the West goes hand in hand with
the progressive consolidation of their democratic regimes. But in the
rest of the post-Soviet states this pro-Western orientation of their
foreign policies contrasts dramatically with the evolution of their
domestic regimes in a general direction that can be assessed as anything
but a democratic consolidation. The picture looks even more confusing
if one takes into account the fact that during the last decade Russia at
least twice changed its foreign policy philosophy rather substantially
(in 1996 when new foreign minister Primakov undertook to build a
'multipolar world' to counter the American  unipolarity , and in 2001
when President Putin again and even more drastically than Yeltsin in
early 90s realigned the Russian foreign policy with the West and
particularly with the United States). These three distinct foreign policies
represented the domestic political regime which was not changing
substantially during the last decade.


Does it mean that the causal relationship between the essence of
particular regimes and foreign policies they project into an international
environment does not work on the Euro-Asian post-Soviet space, and
that we should leave the Kant/Fukuyama formula of democratic peace


105


VLADIMIR KULAGIN


for the West and return into the fold of Hobbs/Kissinger pragmatic
realpolitik to understand the behavior of the countries at the periphery
of democracy? Before coming to such a conclusion it would be prudent
to examine the above mentioned general trends in more detail, to put
them into a bigger picture of the current global politics and to consider
them in a longer term perspective.


To start such an analysis it is necessary to find out with what
kind of political regimes we are dealing in the post-Soviet space. To
assess and to measure the substance of a particular regime it is necessary
first of all to agree on a common yardstick. It is well known that the
political science is still in search of a universally accepted descriptive
definition of a democracy and of quantitative indicators that would
allow us to register the place of a particular polity on a continuous
scale. So, for practical purposes we use in this analysis the data and
indicators of the Freedom House annual surveys, leaving aside for
further theoretical discussion the reservations regarding the 'personal
and intuitive' character of Raymond Gastil's rating system.


The results of these surveys indicate that the 15 states that became
independent after the disintegration of the Soviet Union in 1991 now
form three clusters of political regimes.¹ The first one consists of three
Baltic states which are rated "free":2


|  |  |  |

| --- | --- | --- |

|  |  |  |

|  |  |  |

|  |  |  |

|  |  |  |

|  |  |  |

|  |  |  |

|  |  |  |

|  |  |  |

|  |  |  |

|  |  |  |

1 The following table is based on Freedom in the World 2002. Liberty's Expansion in a
Turbulent World.


2 It is necessary to remind that PR and CL stand for Political Rights and Civil Liberties,
respectively; 1 represents the most free and 7 the least free rating.


106


IN SEARCH OF A CAUSAL NEXUS BETWEEN POLITICAL REGIMES AND FOREIGN POLICY STRATEGIES...


|  |  |

| --- | --- |

|  |  |

|  |  |

|  |  |

|  |  |

|  |  |

|  |  |

If the ratings at 2002 are compared with the results of 1999
survey they indicate some persistent dynamic trends. The first group,
notwithstanding remaining problems with the political rights of the
Russian-speaking non-citizens in Estonia and Latvia, is demonstrating
a steady progress along the path of democratic consolidation. On the
contrary, the regimes in the second group have seen some further erosion
of political rights and/or civil liberties with Kyrgyzstan falling from
"partly free to the “not free” category, while Moldova, Georgia,
Ukraine and Russia lost by 1 point each on political rights and
Azerbaijan sliding 1 point on civil liberties to the lowest level of “partly
free" states. In the third group only Tajikistan improved its score on
civil liberties by 1 point, with the rest of the regimes being in the
process of consolidating their authoritarian characteristics.


Russian political scientist B. Makarenko projects somewhat
different picture of the post-Soviet space.3 Describing the “infant
diseases of the post-Soviet regimes in hospital terms he ranges the
"patients in the following categories:


Lithuania, Estonia, Latvia – “Convalescent”.


-


Moldova, Ukraine, Russia, Armenia – “With Hopes for


Recovery".


Georgia, Belarus, Azerbaijan – “ Chronically Sick”.


3 Makarenko, B. Consolidatsija demokratii: “detskaya bolezn postsovetskich gosudarstv
(Democracy Consolidation: "Infant Diseases" of the Post-Soviet States) <http://
www.politcom.ru/print.php?fname>.


107


VLADIMIR KULAGIN


Kyrgyzstan, Kazakhstan, Tajikistan – “Acute Stage – Danger for


the Life of Democracy".
Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan – “The Doctor's Diagnosis – Take
the Body to a Mortuary”.


But both pictures, differing on details, demonstrate some
common general trends.


The first group of the Baltic states breaks away from the "post-
Soviet" entity having moved up to higher levels of democratic
consolidation and now has more in common with the regimes in the
Central Europe than with its 12 former Communist colleagues. It
became even more obvious in 2002 after the Baltic Republics were
invited into the NATO and the EU. Because of a widening gap between
these three countries and the rest of the post-Soviet regimes it is
progressively less and less fruitful to compare the first group with the
second and the third clusters. In further discussion while referring to
 post-Soviet states we will exclude the Baltic republics, which in our
opinion have already graduated from the  post-Soviet class into the
junior democratic European league.


At the “democratic bottom” of the remaining new independent
states there is a group of regimes of Central Asia and Belarus that have
defied all the hopes about their democratization and at the moment
actually are in processes of consolidating authoritarian rule. Contrary
to the widespread tendency to consider this group in the paradigm of
failed democratization, it can be attributed only to Belarus and
Kyrgyzstan, which initially took the path of democratization, but failed
in this endeavor and moved into the opposite direction. But as for the
remaining members of this group (especially Turkmenistan and
Uzbekistan) it seems that from the very moment of the disintegration
of the Soviet Union they consciously took the path of retaining
autocratic regimes in different disguises. As models they have chosen
pre-democratic 'Asian tigers regimes. It is indicative that in early 90s
Kazakhstan for some time entertained the idea of inviting the former
prime-minister of Singapore to advise on the nation-building process.
That is why when the term “transit” is applied to some former Soviet


108


IN SEARCH OF A CAUSAL NEXUS BETWEEN POLITICAL REGIMES AND FOREIGN POLICY STRATEGIES...


"republics" of the Central Asia it actually describes the transition from
"communist to “national regimes of autocracy and has nothing to
do with shortcomings or failures of the democratization process. 4


The middle group of "partly free regimes has at least one
common feature. They are stuck on the tracks of democratization but
retain a possibility – of course, in varying degree  to resume the
movement in that direction or to slide further back. Taking into account
that this group includes Russia, Ukraine, Georgia and Azerbaidjan (the
latter on the very fridge of it) with most formidable potentials to
determine future of the core of the Euro-Asia space, the fate of the
democratization transit of that group receives additional attention.


Despite the obvious differences between groups 2 and 3, as well
as between countries within each of them, there is ground to consider
both groups as a common domain with some features that unite the
member-countries and distinguish them from other entities, for
example, from the European community. The gap between mean
figures of the ratings on political rights and civil liberties for each
member of the group is smaller than between similar figures of the
"partly free group and of consolidated democracies. The common
heritage and the reality of today's life force them to interact with each
other often more regularly and intensively than with the outside world.
Though the framework of the Commonwealth of Independent States
is far from effective, in a degree it still institutionalizes this interaction.
At the same time all of these regimes are still at the age of adolescence
and even those that have the worst freedom ratings are susceptible to


4 It is interesting to note that after the end of the cold war many political scientists,
including many scholars in the post-Soviet states strongly believed that all post-Soviet
states were destined to move in some linear way along the way of the democratic transition.
When it turned out that the majority of these states took different trajectories of regime
development and some of them from the beginning have chosen the autocratic alternative
to democracy, these authors came to the conclusion about "the retreat of the third wave" of
the global democratization. But the recent surveys indicate that such a pessimism does not
reflect the global tendency and is only partially founded as regards some post-Soviet and
North African regimes. It seems that such a pessimism could be explained by the initial
overoptimistic expectations regarding inevitable and linear trajectories of the process of
democratization for every country. Mellvile, A. On the Trajectories of Political Development of
the Post-Soviet Countries.


109


VLADIMIR KULAGIN


abrupt changes due to crisis, intra-elite power struggles or some other
externally or internally generated shocks.5 For example, it is believed
that after Lukashenko leaves the political stage in Belarus there is a
possibility that the country can resume its climb to democracy. It is
evident that the notorious sultanist regime of Niyazov in Turkmenistan
is very shaky and its domestic and outside support is diminishing. On
the contrary, the eventual succession struggles in Azerbaijan and Georgia
can lead the countries to destabilization with open-ended results.


But a certain degree of commonality coexists with a wide range
of differences. To paraphrase the well-known formula opening "Anna
Karenina by Lev Tolstoy about happy and unhappy families, all
consolidated democracies are free alike, but each undemocratic society
is not free in its own way. There are many explanations of the different
trajectories of regime-building taken by each of the post-Soviet state.
The Baltic states, Western Ukraine and a part of Moldova lived under
the communist dictatorship for ‘only' 50 years and preserved some
memory of the pre-Soviet civic if not democratic societies and the
influence of Catholicism. The nation-building processes in some other
republics (for example, in Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia, Moldova,
Tajikistan) were crippled by separatist and civic strife. The four ‘Stans’
of the Central Asia experienced the revival of the Oriental tradition, as
well as the influence of some extreme forms of political Islam.


After the break up of the Soviet Union practically every former
Soviet republic took efforts to distance itself from Russia, suspecting
and not without grounds – its neo-imperial aspirations. Entry to the
Commonwealth of Independent States was considered mainly as an
insurance to guarantee a peaceful divorce from Moscow. More than
ten years later, it is evident that in general they succeeded. It is indicative
that during the lowest point in relations between Moscow and
Washington over Yugoslavia, in April 1999, every post-Soviet leader
(but Yeltsin and Lukashenko) demonstratively took part at the
celebration of the $50^{th}$ anniversary of NATO in the U.S. capital.


5 Motyl, Alexander J. Ten Years after the Soviet Collapse: Persistence of the Past and
Prospects for the Future. Nations in Transit 2001.


110


IN SEARCH OF A CAUSAL NEXUS BETWEEN POLITICAL REGIMES AND FOREIGN POLICY STRATEGIES...


At the same time in many respects the majority of post-Soviet
states are still dependent on Moscow. For example: Ukraine, Belarus,
Georgia, Moldova are dependent on supplies of Russian oil and gas.
The export routes of Kazah oil and Turkmen gas pass through Russian
territory. Tajikistan and Armenia are dependent on Russian armament
supplies and military presence. The Russian market is still important
for their economies. Every country has a segment of population who
feels nostalgic about their former life within the same frontiers. Less
visible but not less important is the influence of the dynamics of the
Russian domestic reforms on the other post-Soviet states.


Since 1991 Russia was fighting against the inheritance of many
centuries of an autocratic (tsarist and then communist) rule, results of
very painful and controversial shock reforms, as well as of  phantom
pains' of the lost great power status in search for a new identity. Many
observers note that during the Yeltsin's presidency some very important
steps towards dismantling the Soviet heritage and establishing electoral
democracy have already been taken. But at the same time they underline
the persistent inability of the Russian political class to escape from the
heritage of the past. Lilia Shevtsova characterized the Russian political
system created under Yeltsin as a bureaucratic-authoritarian regime of
 impotent omnipotence , that provides for an undivided government,
elected democratically but which happens to operate in an authoritarian
fashion. 6


Vladimir Putin has definitely put his own imprint on the political
regime in Russia. Many authors differ in their assessments of these
changes. For Sam Vaknin Putin's reign is reminiscent of Louis-
Napoleon's Second Empire with the odd mixture of Bonapartism,
militarism, clericalism, conservatism and liberalism and with not very
bright prospects for liberalization.7 In Russia itself many liberals and
democrats hope that in his second term Putin would produce
domestically the breakthrough towards democracy similar to the


6 Shevtsova, Lilia. Boris Yeltsin and His Regime. Moscow: Moscow Center of Carnegie
Endowment for International Peace, 1999.


7 Vankin, Sam. Russia's Second Empire. davidjohnson@erols.com January 11, 2003.


111


VLADIMIR KULAGIN


pro-Western volte-face he mastered in foreign policy after $9/11$. But
Lilia Sevtsova's analysis of Putin legacy and his probable course in the
future is not very optimistic. She puts forward the following
arguments. After his ascendancy to power Vladimir Putin has
consolidated and refined the bureaucratic-authoritarian regime inherited
from Yeltsin under which power is concentrated in the hands of a
leader, while government itself is administered by relying on
bureaucratic and coercive forces. The reformist potential of such a
regime was sustained through the inclusion and integration of liberal
technocrats. The aim of this regime was to combine stabilization with
modernization. The current Presidential course consolidated the regime
by appealing simultaneously to all segments of Russian society. But it
remains based on incompatible principles: centralized almost
authoritarian power and its simultaneous democratic legitimation. In
addition, there is an inherent conflict of interests between the
bureaucracy and economic oligarchy. The most immediate serious
challenges for the Kremlin are Chechnya and an eventual fall of oil
prices which can force the President to take some key decision on
Russia's political future. Putin holds his cards close to his chest and
refrain from explaining his vision of the country's future. The
commentators must interpret his often contradictory remarks.


The pessimists underline his dedication to strengthen the
'verticality of power , the influx of military and security officers into
politics and business, his taming or subjugation of mass media. The
optimists are inspired by the land and judiciary reforms, by his recent
remarks in a meeting with students: “I would like to single out the
development of a feeling of independence and freedom in young people
as an urgent task for us today. Moses needed 40 years to get rid of the
past and to form a new people, but 40 years is a very long period. It is
too long for us". Both sides come to the conclusion that Putin must
make a strategic choice during the presidential election campaign of
2004 or immediately afterwards.


8 Shevtsova, Lilia. Russia Prior to Elections: A Chance for Comprehension. Briefing Papers,
vol. 4, November 2002, Moscow Center of Carnegie Endowment for Peace.


112


IN SEARCH OF A CAUSAL NEXUS BETWEEN POLITICAL REGIMES AND FOREIGN POLICY STRATEGIES...


It seems possible to conclude that the post-Soviet regimes are in
the range of 'not free' - 'partly free' countries, often moving into
opposite directions or stuck on various transition trajectories; their
destination is not yet final.


But we have to concentrate on another problem: how inner-
selves of such post-Soviet regimes with their differences and common
characteristics influence their interaction with the outside world.


It is well known that the realpolitik school which dominated
international relations studies for a long time tends to ignore or to
minimize a causal relationship between a regime – be it a totalitarian
dictatorship or a consolidated democracy – and its foreign policy. The
institutional ‘liberal school of world politics recognizes this relationship
in principle but does not pay much attention to it, concentrating
instead on institutional frameworks and instruments that influence
relations between anyactors. Only recently scholars of world politics,
inspired by Kant's idea that democracy is an important force for peace,
approached the problem of a causal regime/foreign policy relationship.


Paying due tribute to Dean Bubst, R.J. Rummel, Francis
Fukuyama, James Lee Ray, Michael W. Doyle, Bruce Russet, Joshua
Muravchik and many other scholars who brought the idea to the center
of theoretical discussion, it should be noted that they are focusing
their attention mainly on the relations between democracies and in
particular on the proposition of a peace between democracies. This
school has not yet mustered a huge space of inter-democracies relations
at times of peace, and the principles of international behavior of
autocratic regimes and of regimes in the processes of transition.


9 It seems that some practitioners of the world politics intuitively felt this causal relationship
between a regime and its foreign policy long before the scholars discovered it. In the long
run Woodrow Wilson, Aristide Briand, Gustav Streseman and Philip John Noel-Baker
turned out to be more realistic in their vision of an alliance of 'non-despotic' nations than
their realpolitik critics. Harry Truman, Winston Churchill, Jimmy Carter and Ronald Reagan
fought and won the 'Cold War' in a belief that promotion of democracy is not less important
for the world security than power politics. Bill Clinton's 'Enlargement and Engagement'
strategy turned out to be rather effective for the perestroika of the world politics after the
Cold War.


113


VLADIMIR KULAGIN


Ironically, the Marxists and especially the Leninists were the first
(after Immanuel Kant) to discover a causal relationship between
domestic functioning of a regime and its foreign policy although in a
mirror inverted form of the primacy of class struggle. They believed
that foreign policy was in general a continuation of a domestic policy.
That is why Vladimir Lenin was so enchanted by the Clausewitzian
definition of war as the pursuit of political goals by other means,
interpreting it as an additional proof of a linkage between domestic
and foreign policy. Although practical Marxism, as implemented by
Stalin and his successors, degenerated rapidly into a propagandist cover
of a traditional empire-building policy with Byzantine flavor, this
dictum about an indivisible link between the substance of domestic
regime and its foreign policies was a commonplace of the international
studies during the Soviet period. Miraculously, in the midst of
Gorbachev's perestroika the formula abruptly disappeared from
theoretical studies and mass media reports on foreign policy and
international relations.


In late 80s the end of the Cold War was explained in the
paradigm of a peaceful coexistence between socialism and capitalism
in the globalizing environment, when in Gorbachev's words ‘interests
of the humankind could supersede class interests . After the dissolution
of the Soviet Union there were two rival philosophies guiding the
search for Russia's new place in the world. The official version of the
'early Yeltsin's' foreign policy strategy just stated the need for Russia to
be integrated into the Western civilization to create the best possible
conditions for domestic reforms.10 The other was suggesting the
search of a  uniquely Russian Eurasian third way of development. 11


In the middle of 90s these two schools of thought blended into
a hybrid strategy of restoring the role of the state (derzhava) in domestic
politics combined with a growing readiness to act against the United
States and the West in general when their actions, particularly plans


10 Diplomatichesky Vestnik, Special Issue (January 1993).


11 See, for example, Dugin, A. Osnovy Geopolitiki. Geopoliticheskoe Budushee Rossiyi
(Basics of Geopolitics. Geopolitical Future of Russia), Arktogeya, Moscow, 1997.


114


IN SEARCH OF A CAUSAL NEXUS BETWEEN POLITICAL REGIMES AND FOREIGN POLICY STRATEGIES...


for the NATO enlargement and the humanitarian intervention over
Kosovo, were regarded as an infringement of Russia's national interests
and its great power status. But it should be noted that Moscow never
planned a return to a new cold war, understanding its limited resources
and all possible economic, political and strategic repercussions of such
an eventuality. Instead Russia activated a strategy of ‘cold peace as a
middle way between the two extremes which was called 'a return to
more pragmatic policy or  a turn to diversification . 12 In reality it was
an attempt to play the old balance of power game of the realpolitik.
President Yeltsin coined this new ‘multipolar strategy in his emotional
instruction to the Russian diplomatic corps: “Do not lie down under
America, but do not involve us in a major confrontation!”.13


It should be noted that the link between democratization and
pro-Western foreign policy was present in official documents and some
publications only in the early 90s. For example, a conceptual document
on the foreign policy by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, published in
1993, stated:


...the nature of Russian foreign policy is determined by
long-term goals (which seek) to ensure Russia's re-emergence as
a democratic, free state; favorable conditions for shaping a modern
dynamic economy which would guarantee proper living standards
for the Russian citizens; financial and economic independence
for the Russian Federation as well as its fully-fledged and natural
14
inclusion into the world economy.


In later years official documents and scholarly discussions were
dominated by the logic of realpolitik‘multipolarity or  multivectorness'.


Only rarely some liberal commentators noted the significance
of regime values for foreign policy. Analyzing the future of the
antiterrorist coalition between Russia and the Western countries Dmitry
Furman wrote: “Our integration with the West is not a foreign policy


12 Primakov, Ye. 'Russia: Reforms and Foreign Policy', Mezhdunarodnaya Zhizn, 1997, nº 7.
13 Press reports on President Yeltsin's visit to the Foreign Ministry in 1997.


14 Diplomatichesky Vestnik, Special Issue (January 1993) 3.


115


VLADIMIR KULAGIN


choice. It is a problem of our domestic development, which under the
current regime keeps us farther and farther away from the West.
Sometime in future the regime will change and our differences with
the West will convert from differences of diverse political ‘species into
national peculiarities within a framework of the same specie. And only
then it would be possible to make not a situational alliance against a
common enemy, but just an alliance, leading to integration of Russia
into the system of relations that function in the Western world”.15


The efforts of this author to attract attention of the Russian
functions in the students of world politics to the Democratic Peace
Proposition and to the regime/foreign policy causal relationship16 have
actually failed. And not only due to lack of the author's persuasive
power, but mainly as a result of the natural tendency of the majority
of Russian scholars to look at international relations through lenses of
the realpolitik  national interests , which in their opinion is the main
driving force of foreign policies, disregarding the quality of regimes
involved. The only published reaction to that effort was a brief but
rather sarcastic rebuttal by a leading Russian specialist on theories of
international relations who compared the Democratic Peace Proposition
with the Soviet doctrine of ‘peace between socialist countries' and stated
his preference for the conclusion that  it is impossible to define states
as inherently bellicose or peaceful'.17 Similar thinking is prominent in
the majority of publications on international relations and foreign
policy in other post-Soviet states.


Looking at the practical diplomacies of the post-Soviet states
we can distinguish several common features. First of all, they are
opportunistic, or – to use a politically correct term – pragmatic. They
fluctuate rather easily within certain limits. There are many examples
of such a behavior – the above mentioned Russian zigzag foreign policy


15 Furman, Dmitry. 'Friendship Against', Obshaya Gazeta, December 6-12, 2001.


16 Kulagin, Vladimir. Mir v XXI veke: mnogopolyusniy balans syl ili globalniy Pax democratica
(The World in XXI Century: A Multipolar Balance of Power or a Global Pax Democratica).
Polis, nº 1, 2000.


17 Tzygankov, P.A. Teoriya mezhdunarodnych otnosheniy (Theory of International Relations),
Moscow: Gardariki, 2002, 345.


116


IN SEARCH OF A CAUSAL NEXUS BETWEEN POLITICAL REGIMES AND FOREIGN POLICY STRATEGIES...


course during the last decade, the constant turns of the foreign policy
of Ukraine from the Western to the Russian orientation and in the
opposite direction, the initial hesitations of the leaders of the Central
Asia on the American presence before the operation in Afghanistan,
followed by an enthusiastic support.


It is very difficult to generalize on the casual relationship between
a regime and its foreign policy because foreign policy has certain degree
of autonomy. For, example, even different US Administrations
establish different order of priorities to achieve the common long-
term goals. Foreign policies have to take into account ‘national interests'
that have their national peculiarities and traditions even among
democratic regimes. It is enough to compare foreign policies of the
US, France, Japan or Canada. The dominant external mega-trends
like globalization limit the freedom of foreign policies of any regime.
The new independent states were born and are developing in different
environments, have different foreign policy potentials. All this said, it
seems that in the process of interaction of the world community it is
still possible to pinpoint some common features that distinguish
behavior of different regimes.


For the following analysis we would apply the same
18
methodology is used to explain the phenomena of democratic peace.
There are two ways in which democracy might account for the existence
of such a peace. The first, the cultural / normative model, argues that
in democracies decision-makers follow norms of peaceful conflict
resolution that reflect domestic experiences and values. Because
democracies are biased against resolving domestic disputes violently,
they try to resolve international disputes in a similarly peaceful manner,
especially when they deal with other democracies. The second
explanation is the structural/institutional model. It argues that domestic
institutional constrains, including checks and balances, separation of
powers, and the need for a public debate, will slow or constrain decisions
to go to war.


18 See, for example, Russett, Bruce. Grasping the Democratic Peace: Principles for a
Post-Cold War World, Princeton: N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1993.


117


VLADIMIR KULAGIN


The application of these two models to autocratic regimes makes
it evident that neither cultural / normative nor structural / institutional
factors predetermine some definite choice of foreign policy options.
Instead, these options reflect preferences of a ruling elite or dictator,
ideologies or opportunities. One can argue that the inclination of
autocracies to turn to violence domestically to safeguard their position
inevitably projects into the outside environment. Similarly, an absence
of internal checks and balances as well as of the need for public debate
does not constrain a foreign policy choice. Autocracies can be hostile
both to democratic and autocratic countries. It does not mean that
every autocracy is inevitably aggressive. But every undemocratic state
is free to change its foreign policy due to the absence of cultural/
normative and structural/institutional domestic anchors. The case of
the regimes in a process of democratic transition, especially those who
lost their transitional dynamics and are stuck in between autocracy
and democracy, the regimes in the ‘gray area between despotism and
democracy, is more complicated.


Though a linear connection between the degree of
democratization and the stability of a foreign policy course looks
simplistic, there is some truth in such an assumption. It seems that a
process of formation of cultural/normative values, a tradition of civil
liberties and responsibilities that reflects a degree of maturity of a civic
society takes a longer time especially when the movement starts from
very low mark or when the former democratic experience is very distant
or non-existent.


Anyway, when the authoritarian grip is loosened in a degree
even at the lowest levels of democratic transition, there appears some
room for expression of natural preferences of the wider circles of the
population. It is true that the ruling class still has means to mobilize
the population for a bellicose behavior. But sooner or later, especially
in the absence of outright aggression, this mobilization effect soon
subsides because in general the population is not inclined to support
conflicts for which it has to pay a cruel price. Recent history indicates
that the ruling classes in some post-Soviet states did manage to mobilize
their population for domestic armed conflicts or against foreign states,


118


IN SEARCH OF A CAUSAL NEXUS BETWEEN POLITICAL REGIMES AND FOREIGN POLICY STRATEGIES...


but these mobilizations were short-lived. In late 80s-early 90s Tbilisi,
Baku, Yerevan and Kishinev managed to mobilize the majority of their
population to support armed conflicts over Abkhazia, South Ossetia,
Nagorno-Karabakh and Trans-Dniestria respectively, but soon this
attitude it dwindled away. The same happened with the initial support
by the Russian population of the first war as well as the current war in
Chechnya. The majority of the Russian population was very critical of
the NATO bombardment of Serbia, but did not support any appeals
by extremists for Russia to get involved into that conflict. It goes
without saying that in all post-Soviet states the population is not
inclined to support high military budgets, especially in times of
economic hardships. And the majority of governments, especially the
governments of partly free regimes, has to take these aspirations into
account.


It is interesting that even in the category of ‘partly free countries'
the post-Soviet states uniformly ignore human rights violations by
nother states. Their official documents do not mention the promotion
of human rights abroad. Moscow ignored ‘the so called ethnic cleaning'
by Miloshevich's regime in Kosovo and considered it as  an insincere
pretext taken by NATO to promote its strategic goals. Concern over
numerous human rights violations in the post-Soviet states were never
on the agenda of CIS summits or any bilateral official contacts. Moscow
and Ashkhabad officially agreed to consider the recent alleged attack
on Niyazov's cortege, which was followed by the cruel crush of the
remaining political opposition, as a  terrorist act . But at the same
time the semi-independent media, liberal opposition and the growing
number of public non-governmental organizations criticize more and
more harshly their governments for the disregard of human rights by
their foreign partners.


It would be wrong to exaggerate, but cultural/normative factors
do restrict domestically the foreign policy voluntarism of the ruling
class already in the earliest stages of democratization or of the loosening
of autocratic grip over the population.


The structural/institutional factors such as constitutional
constrains, separation of executive, legislative and judicial powers, and


119


VLADIMIR KULAGIN


the need for public support at the ballot box are more operational.
Though liberal parties and independent public organizations are political
minorities in 'partly free' post-Soviet states, their opposition to the
voluntarism of executive powers as well as a debate on domestic and
international relations issues in mass media, however restricted,
additionally restrain the amplitude of foreign policy fluctuations.


Again, these structural / institutional restraints of the transitional
regimes should not be exaggerated. Immediately after the terrorist attack
on the Twin Towers and the Pentagon President Putin held a meeting
with legislative leaders to seek their advice on the position Russia should
take on an eventual US military operation in Afghanistan. It was
reported that of 21 statesmen present 19 advised that Russia should
maintain neutrality, 2 advocated support of such an American
operation, and one legislator was in favor of Russia supporting the
Taliban. It is well known how Putin used that advice. On the other
hand the opposition in Ukraine is quite influential in pushing Kuchma's
administration toward more consistent orientation towards the Euro-
Atlantic community.


It is also important to take into account the influence of the
various interest groups on foreign policies of the post-Soviet regimes
-business, army and security apparatus. As a rule their influence depends
on the degree of concentration of the central power. Autocratic regimes,
more dependent on the support by these groups, at the same time
tend to control them more tightly. But when they loosen their control
and the reform and democratization processes gain momentum these
interest groups acquire more freedom to express their preferences for
certain course of domestic and foreign policies. Very often there is a
clash of interests of these groups or of their individual members. For
example, the majority of Russian oligarchsprefer stable relations with
outside world as a precondition for their entering the world markets.
But representatives of the military-industrial complexes tend to
underline the state of alertness against any potential outside enemy.
On the initial stages of democratization the control of civilian powers
over military as a rule becomes more problematic. The role of the
interest groups on foreign policy of partly free regimes has not been


120


IN SEARCH OF A CAUSAL NEXUS BETWEEN POLITICAL REGIMES AND FOREIGN POLICY STRATEGIES...


studied in detail, but it seems safe to suggest that it differs from the
role such interest groups play in consolidated democracies.


Many authors offer a somewhat different yardstick for measuring
the relationship between transitional domestic regimes and their foreign
policies. For example, Sherman Garnett believes that weak states “are
the most dangerous element of instability and the most likely source
of new trouble sports in the decades to come”.19 It is partially true.
On the other hand, every change is by definition a denial of stability.
Loosening of a centralized state control over society, an entrance of
new non-governmental actors and lobbies into the political process as
well as the temptation of various groups inside the government to
pursue their own interests domestically and internationally in general
diminish stability and predictability of behavior of such states. For
example, some analysts argue that under Yeltsin there were several
autonomous and often contradictory foreign policies – those of the
Ministry of Defense, the Ministry of Atomic Power, the military-
industrial complex as well as of some regional governors. More than
that, Yeltsin was forced to ‘correct his foreign policy course to neutralize
the formidable Communist opposition, especially on the eve of
elections or in times of domestic crises, as it happened after the 1998
financial melt-down.


But 'strong' regimes could pose much greater dangers to the
world security. Very strong regimes in Iraq and North Korea are creating
much more problems than all ‘weak states. The rather 'weak' partly
free regime of Kuchma in Ukraine is less dangerous for the European
community than the  strong not free Lukashenko's regime in Belarus.
The rivalry between strong Uzbekistan and Kazahstan for the leadership
in Central Asia is one of the challenges for security in the region. It is
true that Putin's Russia with its strong ‘verticality of power is more
predictable today than it was in more anarchic times under weak
Yeltsin. But one should not forget that this new stability and
predictability of the current Russian regime rests in greater degree than


19 Garnett, Sherman W., Troubles to come: The Emerging Security Challenges in the
Balkans and the Former Soviet Union. Nations in Transit 2001, 31.


121


VLADIMIR KULAGIN


in earlier days on private choices of one person. At the same time it is
true that the  weakness of such partly free regimes as Georgian and
Moldavian could be a source of new or rather renewed problems,
especially in connection with still unresolved conflicts with separatist
Abkhazia and Transednestria. So, the approach to the post-Soviet
regimes from the point of view of their ‘weakness or  strength could
be productive but only if it is combined with other approaches.


The opportunistic ‘mobility of foreign policies of 'not free'
and 'partly free' regimes rooted in their domestic  mongrel' substance
is an important factor but its modus operandi is limited and influenced
by outside modalities.


The leaders and the ruling classes of the post-Soviet states can
not avoid to take into account the new world environment in which
they operate. This environment formulates new rules of world politics
from which the post-Soviet regimes can try to escape, or bend to a
degree, but can not ignore or change. Democratization of the world
environment is one the most important mega-trends of the world
politics. For the first time in the history of the humankind we witness
the preponderance of democratic regimes, with 89 countries being
'free' 56 - 'partly free' and only 47 – 'not free'. Today 44 percent of
the wold's population live in  free , 21 percent in 'partly free' and 35
percent in  not free ( the population of Communist China accounts
for the majority of this people) countries. This trend is reinforced by
the growing technological and economic dominance of democratic
societies. In 2002 the GDP of 'free' countries stood at \$26.8 trillion
(89 percent), the GDP of  partly free nations at \$1.5 trillion (5 percent),
while the GDP of  not free regimes at \$1.7 trillion (6 percent). The
new democratic preponderance creates the prevailing 'global magnetic
field' that inevitably influence behavior of all actors of the world
politics, facilitating the life of those who take it into account and
creating problems for those who try to disregard it. 20


20 It is not the task of this paper to compare the benefits and the shortcomings of democracy.
It is sufficient to say that the author shares the formula by Winston Churchill to the effect
that democracy is far from the perfect way of government, but all the other known regimes
are less effective and human.


122


IN SEARCH OF A CAUSAL NEXUS BETWEEN POLITICAL REGIMES AND FOREIGN POLICY STRATEGIES...


It is evident that any attempt to challenge the world democratic
paradigm openly by the remaining authoritarian or by  partly free'
regimes is doomed and dangerous for them. So the post-Soviet states
are cautious not to cross the line where they can fall into the category
of 'rogue states'. More than that, some of the post-Soviet states
(Georgia, Ukraine, Moldova) proclaimed and sincerely look forward
the target of integrating in the long run into the Euro-Atlantic
community, but their democratic handicaps work as a brake in the
movement towards this goal. The additional factor is the integration
of the majority of the post-Soviet states into the global and European
institutions or their cooperation with them – UN, WTO, IMF,
OSCE, NATO, EU, and others.


At the same time the leaders of those states see that in the
practice of diplomacy by Western countries military and economic
considerations often take precedence over the promotion of democracy.
For example: Pakistan, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, Kyrgyzstan and Russia
turned out to be more valuable assets for the US anti-terrorist campaign
in Afghanistan than the majority of democratic societies. The American
and European criticism of human rights violations in the Central Asia
states as well as in Chechnya has significantly subsided after the 9/
11terrorist attacks.


It could not be true on the global scale but for certain countries
the threat of international terrorism and its perception by the major
powers had a mixed effect. On one hand, the formation of the global
antiterrorist coalition and the determined resolution to fight this threat
produced solid guaranties for the majority of the post-Soviet states
against their following the example of Taliban in Afganistan. It is true
that the international support of the extremist movements in Fergana
and Pankisi valleys as well as in some other areas of the North Caucasus
was restricted as the result of the antiterrorist coalition efforts. But it
is also true that the Western countries, especially the United States,
moved the goals of democracy promotion in the post-Soviet states to
the back burner. The ruling classes of the post-Soviet states got some
space to parasite on the Western security concerns.


123


VLADIMIR KULAGIN


The main apprehensions of every post-Soviet regime lie in the
field of economy. There is a common knowledge that it would be
almost impossible to jump-start their economies without the closest
possible cooperation with the world (mainly Western) business
community. But this indisputable truth has two sides. The pattern of
the global financial flows indicates that the international business
community prefers to invest in the economies of democratic states.
But when it approaches the emerging markets their main demand is
not for democratization but for stability and profit. The examples of
China, Saudi Arabia, Chile under Pinochet and many other countries
with stable autocratic regimes testify to this conclusion. It can be argued
that in per capita foreign investments the majority of the post-Soviet
countries with the lowest credits for democratization (Kazahstan,
Turkmenistan, Azerbaijan) are ahead of the majority of 'partly free'
states, Russia included. The foreign investments into Turkmen gas,
Kazakh oil, Baku-Jeihan pipeline support this proposition.


The post-Soviet states understand that their strategic value for
the West gives them some leeway to play both ways. Russia, for
example, while understanding that it is almost impossible to reform
and modernize its economy without Western capital and technologies,
feels free to use every opportunity to cooperate economically with
countries that can not be regarded as free or friendly to the West. The
sale of Russian armaments to China, nuclear cooperation with Iran,
the plans to restart arm sales to Syria or oil business with Saddam
Husein, warming up relations with North Korea, playing unification
game with Lukashenko's regime indicate that Moscow wishes to
improve its very difficult economic situation. But at the same time
they testify to certain political unscrupulousness unacceptable among
the majority of democratic regimes but considered very smart and
pragmatic in relations between different regimes. It is noteworthy that
the discussion on possible consequences of the American military
operation against Iraq was concentrating almost exclusively on its
possible effects on the price of Russian oil as well as on the interests of
Russian oil companies in Iraq. The majority of participants came to
the 'cynical but pragmatic conclusion that a protracted US-Iraq conflict


124


IN SEARCH OF A CAUSAL NEXUS BETWEEN POLITICAL REGIMES AND FOREIGN POLICY STRATEGIES...


was in  best interests for Russia. Kuchma's regime in Ukraine, heavily
dependent on the American aid, could not resist the temptation to
make some very dubious arms deals including the suspected sale of
anti-air systems to Iraq.


As for the  efficiency' of the foreign policies of autocratic and
transitional regimes this brief analysis indicates that in the short and
medium terms the foreign policies of  not free or  partly free countries
can be very efficient and profitable as the result of the opportunistic
and unprincipled nature of their foreign policies. Even more efficient
than foreign policies of democratic states, whose freedom of manoeuvre
is limited by domestic values and principles. Operating in the
predominantly democratic environment of the world politics they have
a chance to parasitize on the tolerant nature of democracies, their
capitalist deficiencies and security concerns. But in the long run such
an opportunistic efficiency works against the basic interests of such
societies because it cripples transition to democracy, economic efficiency
and restrains fully-fledged cooperation with the world democratic
community which, as history testifies, is much more healthy and
productive than the selfish games played by regimes of different nature.


The short history of the post-Soviet states allows us to reach
several preliminary conclusions. It demonstrates that the foreign policies
of not free and partly free states are determined by a great number of
external and internal factors. Some of them are common for every
post-Soviet state. Others reflected a score of peculiarities of their
domestic and international positions. But at the same time we can
assert that their is a distinct causal relationship between the position of
a particular regime on the  autocracy – democracy' range and the general
characteristics of its foreign policy. The differences between democratic
regimes on one hand and not free or partly free ones on the other
inevitably manifest in the foreign policies of countries belonging to
the respective groups. The foreign policies of non-democratic states
are prone to opportunism. Their relations with other states
democratic or autocratic – are not principled but situational. Though
they are more difficult to detect there are certain differences in behavior
between not free and partly free states. A degree of voluntarism in


125


VLADIMIR KULAGIN


foreign policy subsides more or less proportionally to the
democratization processes gaining momentum domestically. The
foreign policies of the non-democratic states can be rather efficient
due to their opportunistic nature, but they depend on the degree the
outside world is ready to tolerate such behavior.


126


6


POLITICAL REGIMES AND INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS IN THE TWENTIETH-CENTURY:


IS THERE A EUROPEAN SPECIFICITY?


Denis Rolland


When I proposed several years ago that José Flavio Sombra
Saraiva and Amado Luis Cervo work together with Thomas Skidmore,
Andrew Hurrell and Robert Frank on the theme “Political Regimes
and International Relations from the perspective of the Brazilian
historiography of international relations, it did not occur to me that
this would mean to open new perspectives on Europe as well. The
object of the proposed study was first and foremost Brazil itself and
took its cue from the assumption that the Brazilian historiography of
international relations accorded little importance to regime change
(Empire/Republic, Republic/Estado Novo, military Estado Novo/post-
1945 democratization, democracy/military governments, military
governments/redemocratization). It began, in other words, with an a
priori impression and a desire to examine the weak impact that politics
have had on the conduct of foreign policy as well as the gradual political
“smoothing over” of the history of Brazilian foreign relations. At the
very most, this meant opening the way to a series of continental
comparisons (Argentina, Colombia, Mexico...).


During the 2000 seminar on this theme in Paris, it appeared
that "developing countries should not be considered in isolation from
the states of “old” Europe and the United States. Such an approach ran
too great a risk of encouraging a differential treatment of the
historiography of international relations in the two domains. In
particular, this approach risked willfully understanding the “South” in
an a priori fashion as politically less stable than the “North” (or “West”).
Even though their historiography is older and more advanced, the


127


DENIS ROLLAND


problems posed by developed countries – the countries of Western
Europe, for instance – are just as complex as those posed by developing
ones. Third Republic France, the Vichy regime, and the provisional
government of the French Republic and the Fourth Republic, in this
sense, give just as good an idea of the gap between regime change and
a more or less smooth and uniform historiographical construction of
the policies of those institutions charged with the direction of foreign
policy.


To entrust me with the beginning of a reflection on "regime
change and international relations in Europe is an unwise bet. And
yet, when a long-standing friend, José Flávio Sombra Saraiva, proposed
that I take up the subject again, I could only accept the challenge.
However, it must be treated provisionally, on the one hand taking a
comparative point of view in virtue of my “American specialization,
and, on the other, supplying for Europe nothing more than a few
illuminating glances in recognition that anything more thorough would
risk betraying my necessarily limited knowledge of the historiography
of (Western) European international relations.


1. GENERAL PROBLEMS


Writing on political regime change and its impact on foreign
policy in the twentieth-century poses three preliminary problems:
problems of chronology, of the relevance of the notion of regime
change, and of the respective boundaries of foreign policy and
international relations. One must thus take note of the determinant
place of historiographical constructions in any analysis bearing on
foreign policy, international relations, and political regimes.


PROBLEMS OF CHRONOLOGY BEFORE EVERYTHING ELSE


Historians who emphasize comparative history or, more
particularly, history on a continental or universal scale, often have the
twentieth-century begin with a major event in international relations:
the First World War, whether from 1914, 1917, or 1918. If one adopts


128


POLITICAL REGIMES AND INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS IN THE TWENTIETH-CENTURY...


the less synthetic perspective of national history, however – the history
of some particular country in Europe or America during this period
one finds oneself in a situation in which the “twentieth-century" no
longer observes the same chronology. Seen from this perspective, the
twentieth-century manifests a high degree of elasticity for how one
treats national history and often – but not necessarily – depends on
changes of political regime.


In the case of Brazil, does the twentieth-century begin with an
essential social measure, the 1888 abolition of slavery, or rather the
following year with the regime change that resulted in the proclamation
of the Republic? And does it end with another change of regime, the
process of redemocratization begun in 1964 following the end of the
dictatorship, or rather with the change brought about by Lula's election
as President of the Republic? In any event, international relations – in
this case, the First World War – are not adequately significant for the
country to represent a determinant break.


One may similarly ask whether the French twentieth-century
began with the proclamation of the Third Republic in 1870 or later
with the Dreyfus Affair or later still with an ill-defined Belle Epoque
or even later yet in 1914 or 1918. And what date is one to choose for
its close? Did the German twentieth-century begin in 1871 in the
Galerie des glaces where the process of national unification was finally
made concrete or rather with the 1918 defeat and the proclamation of
the Republic? And did it end in 1991 with the fall of the Wall, the end
of the East German regime, and unification? Did the proclamation of
the Republic open the century in Portugal (neutral in the First World
War until 1916) or Spain (neutral throughout the War) or are other
dates – 1898, for example, in Spain – more significant? And has its
entry into the EEC already opened a new century for the Iberian
peninsula? In the case of Italy, did the rise to power of the fascists in
1922 mark the beginning of the century? Did the Russian twentieth-
century begin with the change of regime in 1917 and close with the
fall of communism?


For England, the problem is altogether different: the English
twentieth-century witnessed no change of regime upon which one


129


DENIS ROLLAND


might base a functional chronological break. In this case, international
relations would seem to predominate, freely supplying the breaks in
historical narratives...


If one takes as one's unit of interest a period of time shorter
than a century, historiographic breaks are similarly discontinuous from
one European country to the next, diverging with the political and
pedagogical circumstances of each nation.


Of course, if one considers states in isolation without seeking
to compare them between themselves, one can often superimpose
chronologies of regime change, foreign policy, international relations,
and even the articulations of inter-state conflict. All the same, each
chronology has its own proper rhythm and certain regime changes are
without necessary repercussions (at least immediately noticeable ones)
for foreign policy and a fortiori international relations. National
historians and, even more, those “official” exposés presented by (or
under the auspices of) Ministries of Foreign Affairs have, for differing
and more or less avowed and conscious reasons, sometimes helped
erase the impact of regime change – in order to reinforce certain traits
common to national foreign policy (the working hypothesis for Brazil),
for example, or to privilege the continuity represented by career
diplomatic personnel and the moderating effect they exercise on the
unknown quantities of politics. Or again, such a strategy may seek to
play down the role of “traditional” diplomats in the conduct of foreign
policy (Germany in the national-socialist period) by exposing the
multiplication of competent organizations in the conduct of
international relations or even to more explicitly efface such and such
a regime from the national memory (the official French strategy, as we
shall see).


THE PROBLEM OF EVALUATING THE IMPACT OF REGIME CHANGE


The second foreseeable problem, the notion of regime change,
is as we have seen of little relevance to certain countries – the United
Kingdom, for instance, or Belgium (or even the United States, of
course). And even when there is a genuine change of regime, its relevance


130


POLITICAL REGIMES AND INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS IN THE TWENTIETH-CENTURY...


is not a fortiori certain in the context of international relations. Here
we face a problem that shall be essential to our colloquium. We began
with the examination of the link between political regime and
international relations in the Brazilian case. With five changes of regime,
is it not a priori reasonable to assume that it will demonstrate few
continuities in regards to foreign policy? In Europe, the arrival to power
in 1922 of the fascist leader Mussolini contributed to change, however
erratically, the course of Italian foreign policy. The ascension of the
German national socialist party in 1933 and the Franco's victory in
Spain in 1938-1939 similarly upset or overturned the foreign policy
of these states. By contrast, it is less certain that Salazar's 1928
assumption of power in the Portuguese state rapidly or radically
modified the direction of Portuguese foreign policy.


FOREIGN POLICY OR INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS


The third and last examination/reflection: for this consideration
of the links between political regimes and international relations to
have meaning, we must not limit ourselves to foreign policy but must
endorse as a milestone and marker in our reflections the essential and
more general notion of international relations.


European political situations are eminently varied. Experiences
differ widely between countries that have not experienced regime
change, like Great Britain and Switzerland, and those countries which
participated in the fascist-authoritarian wave (Italy, Portugal, Germany,
Spain, and also France, even if it was born in defeat...) or were won
over by the expansion of communism – Russia, first of all, but also
the countries born of the peace treaties signed after the First World
War which, in most cases, experienced an authoritarian philo-fascist
phase followed, after the Second World War, by an authoritarian
communist phase, finally becoming democracies with the fall of the
wall and the end of the USSR. And this is not even to take into account
those states created at century's end from the dismantling of Russia,
Yugoslavia, and Czechoslovakia. Of course, there existed trends. Fascist
governments have often, if not always, found affinities between


131


DENIS ROLLAND


themselves, common interests and compatible strategies in point of
foreign policy. In a more direct and functionally joined way, the
communist countries of eastern and central Europe have drawn upon
political solidarity and regime identity to pursue an aligned and thus
very much shared foreign policy. However, in no case has this
frequently observed trait lent to the formation of a general rule.


A good example – as contemporary as one can get – of this
absence of a general rule in the practice and historiography of
international relations can be found in what those national institutions
charged with foreign relations have placed on the internet.


2. OFFICIAL STRATEGIES, HISTORY, AND INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS:
THE INTERNET OR THE ABSENCE OF A EUROPEAN SPECIFICITY


Across the planet, numerous ministries of foreign affairs have
opened internet sites. If, in Europe, it seems normal that each ministry
should direct its own internet site, the situation is quite otherwise
amongst developing countries. Not all states have ministerial sites.
The ministries of foreign affairs of many under-developed states lack
them for reasons of poverty, scarce technical resources, and sometimes
also by choice. The better part of African countries, together with
Paraguay and Cuba, fall into this category.


The sites are at once conceived as practical instruments and
windows. The better part of European countries, those of North
America, and certain of the larger developing countries have embarked
upon this globalization of information. Experience proves that they
are now regularly used as sources of information and documentation
by students and amateur historians of international relations. These
long term state structures, by definition highly visible abroad and
conscious of the role that they play in the diffusion of a national image,
are strongly linked to the history of the country via the history of its
diplomatic relations (too long confused with the history of international
relations).


Nevertheless, to “surf” the existing sites of ministries charged
with international relations is to notice that, in the developed world as


132


POLITICAL REGIMES AND INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS IN THE TWENTIETH-CENTURY...


amongst those countries presently experiencing industrialization, the
relation with history, when there is one, is not linked to the ministerial
structure. Rather, it appears much more closely dependent on the will
of national leaders to give a voice to some or all of the national past.
The construction of an internet site is generally the result of a number
of precise requests. In this respect, whether or not such a site refers to
national history is a matter of significance. It directly touches upon
the kind of image national governments wish to give of themselves, a
certain conception or scale of national power.¹ In this official
framework, the idea that there might be a difference of how the history
of international relations is presented between European countries and
other geographic zones is hardly relevant.


The reported relation to history of these different institutions
varies between two poles: on the one hand, those ministries that have
constructed sites without history and, on the other, those for which
history appears essential.


There are some government sites – in Europe as on the American
continent  that have no history: thus, the sites of the Spanish and
Argentinian Ministries of Foreign Affairs. There are also sites which
again, in Europe as in the Americas – reserve a very important role to
history: the French and Brazilian ministries, for instance. Without a
doubt, there are peoples less interested in history (and their history)
than others. But is there an ideal to be attained here that should be
shared between the various ministries of a globalized world? In the
French and Brazilian cases, recourse has been made to history for very
different reasons. Are these to be considered paradigms or extremes?2


In the area between these two alternatives, there are gradations.
Amongst those European ministries of foreign affairs that do not
concern themselves so much with history in their self-presentation,


1 Due to a lack of information on the preliminary motives behind internet site construction,
all attempts at explanation made in this paper are necessarily conjectural.
2 This work was prepared between June 2001 and February 2002. It reflects a consultation
of sites, much of which took place in the winter of 2001-2002, and thus does not take into
account more recent changes. However, if certain sites have become complete by a process
of adding-on (Mexico), others have been largely revised (France).


133


DENIS ROLLAND


one must include the British Foreign and Commonwealth Office as
well as the somewhat less reserved Farnesina, Italy's ministry of foreign
affairs. Amongst those ministries that supply discontinuous information
must be counted the Département Fédéral des Affaires étrangères (DFAE)
of the Swiss Confederation. Amongst those that supply detailed and
useful information without so much developing their diplomatic
history at length are to be included the MID (Russia), the Palacio das
Necessidades (Portugal), and, outside of Europe, the U.S. State
Department and the ministry of foreign affairs of the People's Republic
of China. Finally, one should mention the Belgian ministry of foreign
affairs, which approaches the matter in a reduced, linear manner.


The following examination of 14 sites, classified according to
the simple presence or absence of a “historical” rubric, aims to evaluate
the weight of national and/or institutional memory in the construction
of a category that particularly implies the image that a state wishes to
give of itself.


FOREIGN RELATIONS: TOTAL OR PARTIAL HISTORICAL AMNESIA


Certain sites contain no history or very little.


To say that certain countries are little interested by the idea of
offering a retrospective vision of their international relations is too
easy, even when considering the costs of building what is a relatively
unimportant site. In fact, it very much seems that the difficulty of
managing a recent past involving change of political regime has been
able to influence the decision of the site's promoters. In other words,
how can one institutionally take into account a recent past that is
responsible for conflict, violence, and wounds, particularly when the
actors are sometimes still living and perhaps even working?


Neither Spain nor Argentina, for example, include a historical
rubric in their respective ministerial sites. And yet both countries
returned to democracy several decades ago and both are countries that
love to celebrate the grandeur of the national past – its empire in the
case of Spain, its memories of economic development and certain iconic
political figures in the case of Argentina. No doubt the insurmountable


134


POLITICAL REGIMES AND INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS IN THE TWENTIETH-CENTURY...


difficulty of accounting for certain segments of that past helps explain
this absence.


In Spain, the memory of Francism is still burning hot. One
need not be a great historian to recognize this. To this general remark,
however, it must be added that the change of political regime, the
brilliant transition to democracy accomplished in this country, rested
on the deliberate and nearly total refusal of “purification in favor of
appeasement and civil harmony. The better part of the Franco-era
functionaries in the Ministerio de Asuntos Exteriores kept their jobs.
Under these circumstances, how is one to both scientifically and
officially present the history of the Civil War, of the Francist crusade,
of Francist Spain at war, and of the long dictatorship that was to follow
late into the twentieth-century? From many points of view, not writing
history when it is not necessary to do so facilitates the management of
the present. Thus, of the 13 rubrics to be found at the Ministry's
home page, not one touches upon history (www.mae.es).3 But this
case is not at all unique to Europe.


In Argentina, the situation can be a priori understood with the
aid of similar hypotheses (even when one takes into consideration
financial questions). The Cancilleria has no online history. All the same,
the country loves to examine the evidence of rapid economic growth
and the promise of Northern-style power in its not-so-distant past.
One finds no history in the Ministry's site. There is thus no consideration
of the different manners in which the great political parties have led
foreign affairs, no mention of regime change, and hence no need to
account for the very recent, difficult, and bloody military past. There
is similarly no need to examine the willfully erratic policy observed by
Argentina vis à visthe United States over this period... If the historian
does not exactly know the reasons that have led to this absence of
history, he can at least understand the difficulties that have led to not
presenting this history there as well as the advantages that might accrue


3 Travelers Advisory, Grants, Fellowships and Readerships, Press Reviews, General
Information, Enter in the MAE, Embassies and Consulates, News, OID Information,
Conferences and Publications, Contests, Links, Subsidiary Organizations, Information for
MAE Employees.


135


DENIS ROLLAND


to said ministry by not raising a delicate question on a site that, it is
true, has been only very slightly developed (www.mrecic.gov.ar).4


These two sites, more detailed than in the Spanish case (13 entries
against 4), are thus exclusively functional and practical and are in no
way rooted in the past.


There are different cases: a ministry that, under pressure of light
historical trauma, forgets a quarter-century of its history, another that
does not display its history beyond the first change of regime...


Italy thus presents very little institutional history on the website
of its ministry of foreign affairs, the Farnesina (www.esteri.it). There
is a little history in the discussion of the ministry's buildings
(www.esteri.it/lafernesina/luoghi/index.htm) and a little also under the
rubric “Servizio Storico but only for the purpose of presenting the
history of ministerial archives in several paragraphs (www.esteri.it/
archivi/servsto/archivsto/archiv1.htm)... In any event, mention is
nowhere made of matters that would indicate the past existence of
another political regime and there is nothing on the fascist era. One
finds neither “Mussolini” nor any of the period's ministers of Foreign
Affairs, even if the ministry's imposing edifice in the Foro Italico is no
stranger to fascist architectural policy. The past is not accepted or not
judged externally presentable (despite obvious traces of continuity in
contemporary society) or, finally, is simply judged unnecessary.


Such selectivity is neither specific to Europe nor to democratic
regimes that are confronted with an authoritarian past. If one turns to
Asia, for example, one finds in the collectively autocratic Chinese
communist regime the same reflex to defy and obscure a “different” past.


Outside of Europe, the English version of the website of
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People's Republic of
China consecrates a modest part of its architecture to history
(www.fmprc.gov.cn/eng). Only one of 34 rubrics is in fact dedicated
to "Diplomatic History (www.fmprc.gov.en/eng/c698.html).
However, behind this single entry, one finds 58 articles that sweep
across themes and domains of foreign relations reflecting a Chinese


4 The Chancellory, Travel Service, Foreign Trade, The Argentine Republic.


136


POLITICAL REGIMES AND INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS IN THE TWENTIETH-CENTURY...


foreign policy very much turned toward little syntheses of the type:
"The Long-term Stable Constructive Partnership Between China and
the European Union”, “Establishment of Sino-French Diplomatic
Relations"6 (www.fmprc.gov.cn/eng/5689.html), “China and Brazil”
(www.fmprc.gov.cn/eng/4320.html)... Nevertheless, as one might
expect, this diplomatic history of China is strictly limited to the
communist era. Imperial and republican China before Mao receive no
space, however minimal, in this external presentation of Chinese history.
At least in the English version, partial historical amnesia depends upon
a policy of deliberate selectivity, a policy that censures any mention of
other regimes besides the present one.


The case of Japan's MOFA is noticeably different. The English
site of the Japanese Ministry (www.mofa.go.jp) is also very detailed,
including a remarkable double-entry system: 13 or 55 categories
proposed on the home page alone! Yet history is not visibly a
preoccupation here (no entry proposed from the outset) nor even a
global concern (there is no general history of the Ministry). Starting
from the rubrics “Postwar Issues” (www.mofa.go.jp/policy/postwar/
index.html) and “Culture”, one comes upon the Bluebook (a publication
of diplomatic documents from recent years, accessible on line beginning
in 1994); there is nothing earlier. A thorough search, however, reveals
that the category “Regional Affairs contains quite a few little historical
notes concerning Japanese foreign relations (www.mofa.go.jp/region),
though these are of an uneven depth. In that part dedicated to the
Near East, for instance, the author refers to a “Silk Road between
Japan and the United States (www.mofa.go.jp/region/middle_e/
relations/history.html). History, however, begins with the “Japanese
defeat" and no mention is explicitly made of regime change
(www.mofa.go.jp/region/n-am/us/relation.html) or relations with the
European Union before 1991 (www.mofa.go.jp/region/europe/eu/
overview/history.html)...


5 The stable and constructive long-term partnership between China and the European Union.
6 The establishment of Sino-French diplomatic relations.


137


DENIS ROLLAND


FOREIGN RELATIONS: A NECESSARY MEMORY


Certain countries make moderate reference to history on the
sites of their ministries of foreign affairs.


Some of them seem to engage in history by necessity
(Switzerland). Others seem to accord a deliberately limited place to
history in order to offer a future-oriented image of the country (Great
Britain) and sometimes also due to a lack of interest in an often complex
past (Belgium). These three countries – Switzerland, the United
Kingdom, and Belgium – have more or less directly experienced regime
change elsewhere in Europe, even as their own domestic regimes
enjoyed a remarkable institutional continuity.7 Others grant history a
middling role (Russia, Portugal, Germany and, outside of Europe, the
United States), managing their past with greater or lesser forthrightness,
disingenuousness, and self-satisfaction.


To judge by its website, the Département Fédéral des Affaires
étrangères de la Confédération helvétique (DFAE) is not very interested
in history (www.dfae.admin.ch). The website offers visitors many
history pages, often by means of sending them to other sites and only
in order to demonstrate its neutrality (the “historical questions of the
Commission indépendante d'expertes dite Commision Bergier.
www.switzerland.taskforce.ch/W/W2/W2a/a1_fn.htm) or in order to
respond to international criticism, particularly concerning the role of
Switzerland during the Second World War (under the category
 Switzerland in the Second World War”). History, in other words,
mainly features when it seems imperative to maintaining the national
image. Otherwise, it is judged superfluous.


Thanks to its strong institutional continuity and its freedom
from radical political change in the twentieth-century, Great Britain
seeks to give an image of itself as of a country turned resolutely towards
the future. The site of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office,
London, for instance, significantly presents itself under the motto


7 Invaded in 1940, Belgian democracy was interrupted until war's end.


138


POLITICAL REGIMES AND INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS IN THE TWENTIETH-CENTURY...


“Creativity, innovation, and quality (www.fco.gov.uk). In what would
seem a relation of cause and effect, history is here offered in
homeopathic doses. In several lines, the very brief “History Notes”
(www.fco.gov.uk/news/keythemehome.asp?9) present the "FCO
Historians”, three series of historical publications, and several practical
aids, to which are regularly added nine short articles, all devoted to the
history of the twentieth-century. One thus finds amongst these titles
"Britain's Entry into the EC”, “Nazi Gold”, and “Women in
Diplomacy"... One also finds several very domestic historical notes in
the presentation of the Ministry's buildings (www.fco.uk/directory/
dynpage.asp?Page $=62$ and www.fco.gov.uk/directory/tour.asp). None
of this is to say that the Ministry is not interested in history; indeed,
far from it. The site's discretion implies no refusal, a fact to which the
works published directly or indirectly under the aegis of the FCO
attest. In its public presentation, however, history is judged neither
determinant nor of the first importance.


The site of the Ministère belge des Affaires étrangères, du Commerce
extérieur et de la Coopération au Développement (www.diplobel.org,
www.diplobel.fgov.be) has not forgotten history but neither is it
slowed down by it. It is in the category “Guide to the Ministry that
one finds the well-named and brief “Historical Survey"
(www.diplobel.org/Ministry/gids%20-%20fr/2.htm). Occasionally
written with a domestic audience in mind (“our country ), the survey
is divided between four chronological “periods”: “1830-1875”, “1875-
1914”, “between the wars”, and “after 1945”. To judge by this
chronology, the two wars “escape” the history of the ministry. In one
phase, “violated neutrality is evoked for the First World War; nothing
is said of the Second. The occupation of Belgian territory during the
First and Second World Wars does not explain much (post-war
reconciliation and the European construction require that the
nationality of the occupying army is never mentioned). And yet there
were working governments in exile during these periods and, within
the occupied area, certain institutions remained functional. Yet there
is no point in insisting. In Belgium, as in France (the "Vichy
Syndrome"), there are elements of a war-era “syndrome”, even if these


139


DENIS ROLLAND


are less important, less widely studied, and less often recognized than
in the French case. The internet site of the Belgian ministry of foreign
affairs is a reflection of this unrealized aggiornamento in Belgian
institutional history.


Apropos extra-European comparisons, the site of Mexico's
Secretaria de Relaciones Exteriores(www.sre.gob.mx) gives an important
place to history (five out of fourteen categories) (www.sre.gob.mx/
acerca/sre/historiasre.htm). But this long exposé (21 pages) is only linear
at a glance. In fact, great emphasis is placed on the twentieth-century
(16 pages) and, more particularly, on recent years (8 pages). In a country
with a first-rate historiography and a well-developed history of
international relations, the terminology of chronological de-coupling
in terms of which the six (very unequal) periods of Mexican history
are presented is rather surprising. Indeed, the manner in which these
periods are joined one to the other gives the impression that the site
was developed less under the aegis of directed revision than by simple
accumulation. After a section on the “Nineteenth-century follows an
elliptical "dawn of the twentieth-century where one might have
expected the word “Revolution”. Following an astonishingly precocious
(from the perspective of traditional Mexican historiography) “post-
revolutionary step” from 1917 to 1946 comes a “modern step", covering
the period from 1946 to 2000. This category is extended to include
the "end of the twentieth-century" where the reforms of 1998 are
evoked. There is also a section on the “new millennium touching
upon, without quite saying so, the end of the Revolutionary-
Institutional Party's hegemony and the rise to power  this time
explicitly noted – of the Partido de Accion Nacional (PAN). Of all the
entries in this category, only the latter appears in boldface on the site,
insisting on the fact that “today we can speak of a democratic Mexico”.
The fundamental twentieth-century regime change represented by the
Revolution, in other words, is, if not quite erased, at the very least
played down in the representation of the Mexican past. This
representation remains very much engaged with the present and
deliberately open to the future.


140


POLITICAL REGIMES AND INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS IN THE TWENTIETH-CENTURY...


The site of the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MID) is
rather complete (www.ln.mid.ru/website).8 However, this holds only
for the Russian version of the site. The English, French, Spanish, and
German versions – all identical – by contrast have been very poorly
prepared and contain only three categories. Unless one allows that such
a difference is “only” an expression of financial exigencies, one must
entertain two other possible and complementary explanations: in the
first place, a sort of “nationalist” prerogative and, in the second, an
interest in providing differential access to national (or Russophone)
and foreign (or non-Russophone) publics.


History is present in ten categories of the Russian language
version. The “archive service”, in particular, presents a global history,
including a chronology of foreign ministers and synthetic articles on a
number of themes (www.In.mid.ru/website/ns-arch.nsf). Three
features of are worth noting here. First, the history of Czarist Russia is
developed at greater length $(4/8es)$ than that of the USSR $(3,5/8es)$
and the site does not insist in the historical category on the policies of
the new Russia $(0,5/8es)$. Indeed, today's Russia is exclusively addressed
in the presentation of several eloquent figures (number of embassies
and personnel) whereas other segments of the past are developed at
length through a number of thematic articles. On the other hand, the
idea of continuity in foreign policy across each regime is clearly affirmed
(somewhat in the Brazilian manner, even if in this case the changes
have been only political). Indeed, the case is made for policy identity
from a period anterior to the Romanovs through the USSR to Putine


from Czarist monarchy through Communism to the nearly
democratic present, in other words. In striking distinction to Chinese
obfuscation, this way of writing or presenting the history of Russian
foreign policy - effacing all changes of policy between one regime and
the next – is not isolated. The same method is, to one degree or another,


8 In 1991, the decision was taken to name it the Ministry of Foreign Relations. However,
this site is still signed "department of the MID" in December 2001. Where relevant, it is
always the MID that is cited.


141


DENIS ROLLAND


to be found at work in the Italian, Brazilian, and even the French sites.
Finally - and this is the third characteristic of the site – the MID
inscribes its policy in a very long term perspective, extending Russian
foreign policy all the way back to the political foundation of Russia.
The first part of the exposé begins with the ninth-century (even France,
though very conscious of its history and the antiquity of that history,
does not dare go so far), a date that, it is true, is commonly accepted as
the birth of Russia (the MID was only created under this name in
1802). Russia is thus presented as taking part for over a millennium in
world-historical stakes. This is a Russia with a relentlessly active foreign
policy, one that is just as present in Byzantium as in contemporary
globalization, the principal agent in the struggle against fascism and
the decisive partner in the Détente...


Portugal's Ministério dos Negocios Estrangeiros has created a
detailed an well-illustrated site in which history enjoys a prominent
place (www.min-nestrangeiros.pt/mne), occupying – albeit modestly
the third of seven categories (with three sub-categories out of 28).
The "Aspectos Historicos consists of three elements. The briefest of
these, “História da Instituição”, is half a page in length (www.min-
nestrangeiros.pt/mne/historia). The “Sinopse da Historia Diplomatica
portuguesa", for its part, is in fact a simple (and undated) list of
sovereigns and is followed by a long and detailed chronology that
includes, with dates, the ministers of foreign affairs and the principal
events chosen by a diplomat (www.minestrangeiros.pt/mne/
histdiplomatica/principal.html). The historical presentation closes with
a series of “discussions”, “Discursos”. However, in focusing its very
detailed chronology (36 pages) on the ministry, its ministers, and the
history of diplomatic relations, this part of the site does something
remarkable (www.minnestrangeiros.pt/mne/histdiplomatica/
sino36.html): nowhere is regime change mentioned. Indeed, the name
of Salazar only appears in 1936 and then simply to acknowledge,
without offering the reader any indication of his principal function,
that he had taken provisional charge of the Ministry... There is thus


9 The name next appears in 1942, 1943, and 1957.


142


POLITICAL REGIMES AND INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS IN THE TWENTIETH-CENTURY...


no admission of regime change in the 1920's and just as little for
the 1970's.


The site of Germany's Auswärtiges Amt is in this respect much
more successful (www.auswaertiges.amt.de). There is an immediate
historical entry (www.auswaertiges.amt.de/www/de/aamt/geschichte/
index.html) as well as another for certain archives (www.auswaertiges.
amt.de/www/de/infoservice/politik/index.html). The historical portion
of the site presents a general history of the Ministry since 1870 and
does not avert its glance from the Nazi period. What's more, certain
pages tend to underline, not without reason, the fact that traditional
diplomacy and the Ministry had lost (some) of their importance, power,
and, implicitly – most important for the site and the image of the
Ministry  responsibility during this period, to the degree that the
National Socialists had allowed both the Party itself and a collection
of other ministries (in particular, the Ministry of Propaganda) to play
a role in the construction of foreign policy.


Crossing the Atlantic, one finds that the North American State
Department's site is, like its German counterpart, clear without skirting
major issues (www.state.gov). It is of course true that it disposes of
greater financial, technical, and scientific means than, say, the Portuguese
site but it also has fewer political variations to explain, justify or forget.
The historical portion of the site (History, Education & Culture, one
of nine site entries) opens on to the Office of the Historian. This is
first and foremost reserved to sources and responding to questions
from the public and researchers. A project of the State Department's
Bureau of Public Affairs, the site includes in its historical category
eleven windows, including a detailed chronology of the voyages
undertaken by the President and Secretary of State (www.state.gov/r/
pa/ho/trv1/c4388.htm), a special section on documentation relating
to the “Holocaust”, and a chronology of national diplomatic history
(Timeline of US Diplomatic History). There, as in the French site,
one finds a rather commonplace portrait gallery (www.state.gov/r/pa/
ho/c1799.htm) which allows one to click on the images and pass
directly to a more extensive discussion (diplomatic history in the
American case, biographies in the French one). However, as of early


143


DENIS ROLLAND


March 2002, this part of the site has only been completed for the
period of Independence (the French site, in this respect, is complete).


FOREIGN RELATIONS: THE EXPOSURE STRATEGY OR THE
INSTRUMENTALIZATION OF HISTORY


There are other countries in which the institutional strategy seems
to be exactly the inverse of that of Spain or Argentina. Such is the case
of France and Brazil. Here, one finds one's self confronted with an
abundance of history.


The site of the French Ministère des Affaires Étrangères
(www.diplomatie.gouv.fr/index.html) contains, together with that of
Brazil, the most exhaustive discussion of history. It is also, in this
domain, the most complete site; indeed, it is remarkably detailed. Under
the rubric "diplomatic archives” (www.diplomatie.gouv.fr/archives/
index.html), one of thirteen site entries, history appears in nine (in-
depth) sub-rubrics, including a very handsome portrait gallery with
accompanying discussion (www.diplomatie.gouv/archives/dossiers/
140ministres/index.html) and a short series of “Great Diplomatic
Figures" (www.diplomatie.gouv/archives/dossiers/grandes-figures/
index.html): Richelieu, Vergennes, Chateaubriand, Briand.


The site was reworked and improved in 2001. A preface to the
archives rubric (Hélène Carrère-d'Encausse) has been eliminated.
Nevertheless, the site conserves a profound trace of the Vichy syndrome
in the administration of foreign affairs. In the portrait gallery that
begins in 1574 with Luis de Revol,10 a pretty and very artificial
continuity allows one to pass almost directly from the end of the
France of the Third Republic to that France in exile grouped in London
around General de Gaulle. In a certain manner, the reader is invited to
think that foreign affairs did not exist under Vichy and that the Ministry
thus had nothing to do with the “Années noires . This total
simplification of memory is by no means particular to the Ministry's
website; it is also the version advanced by the precious and singular


10 In 1589 in the title.


144


POLITICAL REGIMES AND INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS IN THE TWENTIETH-CENTURY...


synthesis of the history of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs published
by CNRS¹¹ as well as by the Annuaire diplomatique, an official annual
publication of the Ministry (or by the French Association of Artistic
Action in a hardly modified form)... The internet site of the Ministry
thus presents in its portrait gallery a chronology of images that is entirely
consistent with the dominant memory – the term is not the most
modern – of the Second World War: which is to say all that one does
not wish to understand about Vichy. At a detailed level, the margins
of obfuscation are lightly fluctuating with the Third Republic
prolonged by a semester under Paul Baudoin – a “minister of the Vichy
government", 12 of course, but at the same time a “minister of the
Third Republic". 13 Nor is this internal contradiction a cause of
embarrassment. If Laval is absent from this sector of the portrait gallery
as Minister of Foreign Affairs during the Second World War, he
nevertheless appears under the rubric dedicated to the inter-war period,
having in fact occupied this position on five separate occasions between
1932 and 1936. And once one “clicks” on this portrait of Laval, the
text has him reappear as Minister under the Occupation – but only
from April 1942 through August 1944, not from October 1940 to
December 1941. As if the origins of the French state (it is true for that
part of this site concerning the Third Republic), however fundamental
to the history of collaboration and the politics of exclusion, should be
spared Laval!14 The confusion between the memory and history of
the Second World War is thus evident (according to common
“scientific” stereotypes) in the representation offered by the site of the
French Ministry of Foreign Affairs. This confusion is deliberate: from


11 Les Affaires étrangères et le corps diplomatique français, vol. II, CNRS, Paris: 1984.
12 The treatment of the Second World War in this site seems to have given way to ample
debates in the Ministry but the tradition denying all overlap between the Third Republic
and Free France seems to have resolutely swept it away.


13 Baudoin stepped down after Montoire, Laval taking charge of the Ministry.
14 "Laval Pierre. Senator, President of the Council, died 15 October 1945. 14 January – 21
February 1932; 13 October - 7 June 1935, thrice minister; 7 June 1935 - 24 January 1936,
Senator, President of the Council, Minister for the fifth time. 18 April 1942  August 1944,
Minister of the Vichy government" www.diplomatie.gouv/fr/archives/expo/140/2guer/
08.html.


145


DENIS ROLLAND


the earliest stages of site construction, it was decided to overlook the
scientific objections raised by certain members of the committee
charged with organizing it.


The Brazilian Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Ministério das Relações
Exteriores) (www.itamaraty.gov.br) is also an example of a ministry
that places great emphasis on national history and, in particular,
the history of international relations. Here, too, we see that the
historiographical construction instrumentalized by official institutions
is in no sense unique to Europe. This example also allows us to conclude
with the country that once again welcomes us, each time better than
the last. One of the fifteen entries (Temas de Política Externa) found at
the site of the Brazilian Ministry leads to either a brief “Panorama
da Política Externa or towards “A construção da nação (http://
www.mre.gov.br/cdbrasil/itamaraty/web/port/index.htm). Above all,
one of the three entries presented as central to the site, “A Diplomacia
Brasileira" opens on four primarily historical rubrics. The second of
these, the “História da Diplomacia brasileira (http://www.mre.gov.br/
acs/diplomacia/portg/h_diplom/menu_hd.htm) is a remarkable work
of history in two versions, Portuguese and English, each of which is at
least a hundred pages long (http://www.mre.gov.br/acs/diplomacia).


The important place given history here is no doubt linked in
part to the existence and antiquity (relative to most other countries on
the continent) of the Diplomatic School, the Instituto Rio Branco. It is
also linked to the remarkable sophistication of the Brazilian history of
international relations. And yet these explanations are not enough,
even if the analogy between France and Brazil would seem to support
them. For the study of the history of international relations is highly
developed in other countries as well (the USA, Germany, and so on).
Similarly, Brazil is not alone in supporting a well-established program
for training diplomats (UK, Germany, etc.). Unlike Brazil, however,
these countries have chosen to develop their ministerial web sites in a
different manner altogether. If Brazil has chosen to emphasize its
diplomatic history, this fact no doubt has much to do with a desire to
justify its power, at least regionally, by publicly underlining the rich,


146


POLITICAL REGIMES AND INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS IN THE TWENTIETH-CENTURY...


well-studied, and historically “linear” character of its national foreign
policy.


In the fourteen sites we have examined, one observes a variety
of sometimes complementary strategies for drawing upon history.


For certain sites, history poses problems that have yet to be
surmounted (Belgium). The responses and evasions to this situation
vary widely. These include total amnesia (Argentina and Spain),
partial amnesia (Japan and China), taking short cuts around difficult
periods (Belgium), and political “smoothing over” or highly simplified
reconstructions (Portugal) that can sometimes appear genuinely
acrobatic in their contradictions (France). As recent events in France
show, the deliberate “managing” of history involved in this last approach
is largely useless.


Elsewhere, history appears as an expression of the age – indeed,
the antiquity – of institutions. This category includes all those sites in
which the antiquity of regional power is emphasized (Russia and France,
in particular).


Finally, there is history as affirmation or memory of national
grandeur, namely, those sites where an aspiration to national grandeur
is implicitly evoked by reference to an immensely rich and detailed
history (Brazil and France).


In most cases, however, one fact stands at the heart of the
multiple biases, evasions, masks, and obfuscations found at these sites:
political regime change. It goes without saying that this is a subject
that demands further study. Such a study would require a team of
specialists capable of conducting research across European languages.
Understanding how political regime change is managed would also
require examining many other aspects of these sites: how they are
created; the writing of the diplomats and historians who, whether
members of the institution or not, have contributed to the historical
pages; the construction, use, and sometimes disappearance of national
heroes; the representation of foreign countries...


Beyond this examination, it remains to suggest something of a
response to the question with which we began: on the basis of the sites


147


DENIS ROLLAND


studied, there seems to be neither a trait specific to European
international relations in the twentieth-century nor any strategy
particular to European countries for writing the history of international
relations – especially when it comes to the question of political regime
change.


148


7


THE CONTINUITY OF AMERICAN FOREIGN POLICY


Christopher Coker


"The critical moment in the twentieth
century will come when nineteenth
century ideas no longer have the power
to keep a twentieth century people
in their grasp" (GK Chesterton, on
a visit to the US in 1921).


Among the papers Woodrow Wilson took to Versailles in 1919
was a much underlined memorandum from the American academic,
Frederick Jackson Turner, a scholar Wilson greatly admired. Turner
thought that the genius of American democracy might be injected
back into Europe. The gist of his paper, entitled ‘Interest political
parties in a durable League of Nations , was that America's experience
was probably not unique after all. The American frontier experience
might provide a model for Europe's future. Of course, the political
parties were not vacant lands which Turner believed to be the essence
of democracy, a thesis that had made him famous. The frontier, he
claimed, had been the cradle of democratic ideals that ultimately
fostered the discontent that precipitated the breach between the colonies
and England. Now they could bring the New and Old Worlds together,
as they had in 1917. The central theme of American foreign policy
after the war, he insisted, should be to apply the frontier experience by
sustaining a pluralistic party system or democratic order that would
mitigate the worst aspects of European nationalism and thus prevent
future wars. 1


As a President, Woodrow Wilson remains the most influential
for he was the man who took the United States into European history


1 Lloyd Gardner, A Covenant with Power: America and world order from Wilson to Reagan,
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1982, p. 23.


149


CHRISTOPHER COKER


in 1917, the year that Lenin took Russia out of it when he concluded
peace with Germany at Brest-Litovsk. When the Soviet Union re-
emerged into history once again in 1945 many American Presidents
in dealing with it found inspiration in Wilson's vision of a world made
safe for democracy. Lyndon Johnson often quoted Wilson's assertion
that "we created this nation not to save ourselves but to save mankind".
Jimmy Carter tells us in his memoirs that when he pondered what to
say in his inaugural address Wilson's speeches influenced him the most. 2


If Woodrow Wilson affords one element of continuity in
twentieth century American foreign policy Jackson Turner affords
another. It is to Turner that we must first turn if we are to understand
what is most consistent about the foreign policy of the United States:
the fact that it is a country that has been sustained by a national myth,
and a myth that is inherently modern.


TURNER, THE FRONTIER MYTH AND THE AMERICAN IMAGINATION


Frederick Jackson Turner imposed on American history a view
that stressed its frontier as the crucible of American nationality, and its
own exceptionalism. He is perhaps the best example of how a historian
helped forge a national myth, and with it a national ideology. From
1892-1910 Turner was Professor of American History at the University
of Wisconsin. At the outset of his career he was invited to give a paper
at a special convention of the American Historical Association at the
Chicago World Fair in 1893. The thirty-three year-old Turner presented
the paper on "the significance of the Frontier in American history”, a
paper which made him one of the most celebrated of American
historians of his time. His main contention was that "the factor of
time in American history is insignificant when compared with the
factors of space and social evolution...”. Turner considered constructed
space as a lived experience and therefore socially produced.
Consequently the American West was a form of society rather than
a place:


2 Jimmy Carter, Keeping Faith: memoirs of a President. New York: 1982,  . 19.


150


THE CONTINUITY OF AMERICAN FOREIGN POLICY


The frontier is the line of most rapid and effective
Americanisation. The wilderness masters the colonist. It finds
him European in dress, industries, tools, modes of travel and
thought. It takes him from a railroad car and puts him in the
birch canoe. It strips off the garments of civilisation and arrays
him in the hunting shirt and the moccasin. It puts him in the
log cabin with the Cherokee and Iroquois... In short, at the
frontier, the environment is at first too strong for the man. He
must accept the conditions which it furnishes or perish. But little
by little he transforms the wilderness, but the outcome is not
the old Europe, not simply the development of Germanic
germs.... The fact is, that there is a new product that is
American... Thus the advance of the frontier has meant a steady
movement away from the influence of Europe, a steady growth
of independence on American lines. 3


As Turner revealed some years later to Carl Becker, one of his
most influential students, his path-breaking essay was “pretty much a
reaction" to what he considered the mistaken notions of his Johns
Hopkins mentor, Herbert Baxter Adams, who had insisted that
American history had been done, that historians were better off
researching the history of Europe. 4


The frontier thesis, in other words, was a way by which Turner's
generation, by deconstructing the American past, rejected the European
biased origins theory which dominated American history in his day.
What he presented instead was a steady growth of the American
character which pointed to the exceptional nature of American
nationality. If the United States first entered European history in 1884


3 Each generation produces fresh commentaries on Turner. See for example Benson, L,
Turner and Beard: American historical writing reconsidered. New York: Free Press, 1960;
Billington, R. A. (ed), Frontier Thesis: valid interpretation of American history? New York:
Holt, Rienhart & Winston, 1966. Noble, D, Historians against History: the frontier thesis and
the national covenant in American historical writing since 1830. Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press, 1965.


4 Richard Etulain, Writing Western History: essays on Western major historians. Albuquerque:
University of New Mexico Press, 1991, p. 6-7.


151


CHRISTOPHER COKER


at the Congress of Berlin (which it attended as an observer) it re-entered
it in 1917 – this time as a principal actor – the myth of the frontier
had captured the American imagination.


Using that word, of course, one is reminded immediately of
the difference in key terms that characterises the debate on US foreign
policy. Some commentators prefer to see it in terms of socio-economic
forces, vested interests and power; others see myths, norms, and culture
as the important influence. I confess myself a member of the second
school. Ideas have been the principal theme of international politics
for the past two hundred years. This was the great illumination of the
European Enlightenment (which gave birth of course to the American
republic). Once science replaced faith as the principal source of
knowledge the question had to be asked: did the perception of the
senses distort external reality, or did the senses indeed make it up?
Ironically, science was the last field to recognise (in Heisenberg's
Uncertainty Principle of the 1920's) that the observer influences the
events that are observed; that the participating mind changes the reality
in which it participates. But if scientific thought took a long time to
make this point social thought did not. Ideology (an eighteenth century
term) was grounded on the principle that reality affected the mind,
just as the mind interpreted reality – that generated the seed of the
ideological wars of the twentieth century.


De Tocqueville told us that we will never understand a people if
we do not understand their ideology and their myths. Without irony
Max Lerner once entitled a book  Ideas are weapons'. What gives
ideology its force is its passion. Truth lies in action, and meaning is
given to experience by  a transforming moment which more often
than not in the modern age was war. And the heroic feats of war are a
powerful stimulus to national imagination.


I recognise, of course, that there is no such thing as an American
imagination in the sense of some communal or historically constructed
entity which passes from generation to generation and touches the
whole nation. There are, however, identifiable social traditions which
can be discussed in terms of common themes. In this case we are
discussing a particular ideology.


152


THE CONTINUITY OF AMERICAN FOREIGN POLICY


Ideology is neither a religion nor a philosophy, nor the
interpretation of folk stories or works of art, even though it may draw
on all of these and other sources. Ideologies are the collective myths
around which a nation understands itself and distances itself from
others. The problem for the United States, writes Agnes Heller, is that
there were no old memories, no old stories, no mythologies, no
indigenous fairytales that could help make the United States understand
itself. There might have been stories of the War of Independence, and
later of the Civil War, but these stories hardly formed a living memory
or a collective consciousness. American nationalism was strong by the
1890s but it was not historically grounded. As a social invention the
US needed to invent a myth, a historically rooted story and memory
which the frontier myth offered. And she adds, the more ‘historical'
an ideology is, the deeper its historical roots, so the greater part acts of
war and conquest will play in it.5


If myths are one of the key features of modernity, modern myths
differ from pre-modern in terms of agency: the ability to make one's
own future. And as a myth, Turner's thesis performed a number of
functions that were important for the Great Power America was in
the process of becoming.


1. It offered a way of absorbing the immigrants in a historical
myth that was peculiar to the United States. The importance of
immigration was already evidenced in Madison's Tenth Federalist Paper.
It was only by enhancing the diversity of the population of the New
World, claimed Madison, that the United States could avoid any one
group dominating another. Thus the existence of the frontier had a
formative effect on the development of the United States and later on
the development of America's international thought. Madison
recognised that other nations had an interest in America's internal affairs.
Only later did the United States begin to have an interest in the internal
affairs of other nations. 6


5 Agnes Heller, A Theory of Modernity, p. 102-103.
6 James Madison, Federalist Papers, nº 10.


153


CHRISTOPHER COKER


The fact that in the multiethnic society the United States became
in the course of the twentieth century the ethnic factor might be
exploited by others was to endure well into the twentieth century.
One hundred and fifty years later the same question was posed by
Allan Bloom in his book The Closing of the American Mind. America,
he insisted, "cannot be sustained if the people keep only to their own
ways and remain perpetual outsiders. The society has got to turn them
into Americans". In that sense, foreign policy was indeed domestic
policy writ large.


2. Turner's writing struck such a chord because it tapped into an
American imagination at a particular moment in its history – on the
eve of the Spanish-American War (1898) when it was at its most self
-confident. It was a mood captured by Joseph Conrad in Nostromo
especially in the person of one of its chief characters, the Yankee
businessmen Holroyd, who we are told, has “the temperament of a
Puritan and an insatiable imagination of conquest”. Holroyd has a
globalising eye, and an implicit belief that the twentieth century will
be America's. “We will be giving the word for everything: industry,
trade, journalism . . . we shall run the world's business whether the world
likes it or not. The world can't help it and neither can we”.8


The frontier myth was important for the sense of mission it
imparted to American policy abroad. Turner had insisted that the land
in the West had the power to shape America's political, economic and
cultural institutions and, in particular, its commitment to democracy.
For the frontier myth stressed the exceptional character of American
nationality: a free people creating a free land. And free land was not
the empty space of geographers. It was time as well, for Turner created
a timeless or historical uniqueness to America which gave the frontier
a determining power over different generations. What Turner produced
was what he himself called “the national history of the American spirit"
which could also account for the development of the spirit after 1890,
the year in which the frontier was finally closed. In the coal barons,


7 Allan Bloom, The Closing of the American Mind, New York: 1986.


8 Joseph Conrad, Nostromo, London: Penguin, 1990,  . 94-951.


154


THE CONTINUITY OF AMERICAN FOREIGN POLICY


steel kings, oil kings and railway magnates of twentieth century America
he saw a new social dynamics. Even in the robber barons of his own
day he saw the same “constructive fever to seek new avenues of
action and power...” to express the horizon of the nation's activity.9


3. Above all, Turner's thesis should be seen as only one of a
series of nineteenth century myths which so much influenced the
twentieth century state that the US was to become. As Dean Acheson
recognised in the 1960s, “we are not a twentieth century people: we
are a nineteenth century people: our minds are not our own but our
great grandparents minds”.10 The nineteenth century, the historian
Norman Stone once observed, had all the ideas; the twentieth century
had the technology to realise them, to carry them out. This was the
unique dialectic of America's engagement with the world.


Turner's thesis, to be sure, was only one of a number of
nineteenth century myths (retributive justice in the Wild West was
another – as we shall see) all of which inspired US policy makers as the
twentieth century unfolded. What the paper Turner drafted for
Woodrow Wilson shows is that every generation recreated a myth or
tradition by inspiring different policymakers at different times.


AMERICAN MODERNITY


As I have argued, the frontier myth was part of an ideology.
Both the myth and the ideology were inherently ‘modern . In looking
at the nature of US modernity I am influenced by the work of Talcott
Parsons and especially by his book The Evolution of Societies (1977).
Parsons contended that what distinguished the US was the
 associational pattern of modernity (an idea which was at the core of
the frontier thesis). It made everyone equal in the eyes of the law and
the eyes of each other. Parsons was not the first, nor, I suspect, the last
social commentator to appreciate the unique cultural configuration of
America. De Tocqueville in many ways had done this before but Parsons


9 Alan Munstow, Writing History: Frederick Jackson Turner and the deconstruction of American
history in Cologne-Broukes (ed) Writing and America, London: Longman, 1996, p. 18.
10 Dean Acheson, This Vast Eternal Realm, New York: W. W. Norton, 1973, p. 172.


155


CHRISTOPHER COKER


was one of the most persuasive recent commentators. For he argued
that the industrial and French Revolutions, as Hegel recognised, had
initiated a major transformation in Western Europe which had led to
the emergence of the first modern society. Where the Industrial
Revolution had differentiated the economy from the 'societal
community', the democratic revolution had differentiated the polity.


Both processes of differentiation had led to the need for a new
form of social integration. The identification of ‘integration' as the
central problem of modern societies was at the heart of Parson's own
understanding of modernity. For the emergence of modernity is
associated in his work with the weakening of the ‘ascriptive framework'
of monarchy, aristocracy and established churches, as well as an economy
circumscribed by kinship and localism. In his view, what made the
US different from other modern societies was the fact that the industrial
and democratic revolutions were more intimately combined in
America. So much so that he argued with De Tocqueville that not
only was the United States unique but it was unique because it had
taken the lead “in the latest phase of modernisation”.11


What struck Parsons is what strikes the visitor to the United
States today – the existence of a secular public education, the relative
absence of divisive forms of social consciousness and an associated
 openness' of class structure which accounts for the absence of a socialist
party of any electoral importance (a problem which taxed Western
Marxists such as Gramsci in the 1920s). Parsons attributed the absence
of what Nietzsche would call the politics of ‘resentiment (the relative
absence of alienation) to a shift from ‘ascription to ‘achievement . All
modern societies, of course, are distinguished by this trend but the US
is distinguished the most. Within American society there is a clear
trend to 'volunteerism , ‘civic activism and  egalitarianism , which makes
the United States the most pluralistic or inclusivesocial community in
the world.


It was that inclusiveness that inspired the United States to include
the rest of the world in part by making the world safe for democracy


11 Talcott Parsons, The Evolution of Societies, Engelwood Cliffs: Prentice Hill, 1977, p. 182.


156


THE CONTINUITY OF AMERICAN FOREIGN POLICY


(the great Wilsonian project, and that of his successors). Elaborating
on the distinctiveness of American society Parsons went on to contend:


Universalism which had its purest modern expression in the
ethics of aesthetic Protestantism has exerted continuing value
pressure towards inclusion now reaching the whole Judeo-
Christian religious community and beginning to extend beyond
it. The inclusion of this component alone could not lead to a
static universalistic tolerance. It is complemented by an activist
commitment to building a good society in accordance with Divine
Will that underlies the drive toward mastery of the social
environment through expansion in territory, economic productivity
and knowledge. The combination of these two components contributes
to the associational emphasis in modern social structure – political
and social democracy being conspicuously associational.12


The presence of an  associational pattern of development in the
US provided a favourable context for  an early initiation of the
educational revolution and its extension further than any other
society'. 13 For Parsons the importance attached to education and even
the role of educationalists represented the third revolution, one still
largely specific to the United States. As central a feature of American
modernity as the other two, it constituted the vital mechanism
through which the stratification and occupational systems were opened
up and the associational pattern strengthened in the course of the
twentieth century.


Now, it seems to me that if Parsons is correct (as I think he is)
three conclusions follow. And all three in turn explain the ideological
continuity of American foreign policy from the time the United States
came into world history in 1917. Perhaps, it applies even earlier, from
1850 onwards, in its relations with its Latin American neighbours.


1. It is the associational emphasis in US policy (or pluralism)
that explains its pluralistic foreign policy – its wish to include other


12 Ibid, p. 187.


13 Ibid, p. 191.


157


CHRISTOPHER COKER


societies in the American project which is to be found at the heart of
both its 'exemplarist and  redemptionist' ideologies.


As for exemplarism, the message is simple. As the richest country
in the world, richer in material and human resources than any other,
the United States has a role, if a limited one: to save the world by the
example it sets, rather than by its exertions. One is familiar with many
of the slogans of exemplarism: the Puritans ‘shining city on the hill';
Madison's 'workshop of liberty'; Roosevelt's ‘arsenal of democracy';
and more recently, Reagan's  beacon of liberty . Exemplarism has its
nineteenth century roots, particularly in the advice of the Founding
Fathers. John Adams, for one, claimed to be a well wisher of freedom,
though not its champion. Lincoln later argued that if the US tried to
champion freedom it would lose its own. Even in the 1930's exemplarism
carried a message. For Americans did not call their policy ‘isolationism.’
Instead, Herbert Hoover talked of the country's 'independent
internationalism'; Charles Beard, the historian, preferred the term
 imperial isolationism'.14 One was ‘internationalist because it set an
example Americans hoped others would follow; the other was 'imperial'
because of its ambition.


Parsons was right, however, to identify a puritan subtext to
American modernity for there was another ideological mandate which
the US increasingly chose to pursue – ‘redemptionism'. Indeed, writes
Perry Miller, “any inventory of the elements that have gone into the
making of the American mind would have to commence with
Puritanism.... [for] without an understanding of Puritanism there is
no understanding of America”.15 Under his administration, Truman
told the American people, the United States had finally  stepped into
the leadership that God had intended'. When Secretary of State, Dean
Acheson was enthused with much the same idea. Later in his memoirs,
Present at the Creation, Acheson recalled how his father “widely
read in Christian doctrine” had aimed at the salvation of his soul by


14 Charles and Mary Beard, America in mid-passage, New York: Macmillan, 1939, p. 437.
15 Perry Miller, The Puritans, v. 1, New York: Harper and Row, 1967, p. 11.


158


THE CONTINUITY OF AMERICAN FOREIGN POLICY


performing charitable works.16 And this is what the Truman
administration attempted to do through the Truman Doctrine.


Another element of Puritanism was the belief in the necessity
of hard work. God's grace had to be earned by hard labour. A slothful
or lazy people were unlikely to succeed. Thus we find even a liberal
conservative like George Kennan lecturing the Third World in the
1970s on the need for hard work. In his memoirs this is what he
writes of his great grandparents in Wisconsin, Turner's academic home
before he left for Harvard in 1910.


The Wisconsinites worked hard. Had they been like the
Africans, a violent, lazy people, devoted more to war than industry;
had they wasted what little they held in civic strife, they would
be what Africa is today. Is no credit to be given to the old-
fashioned American virtues of thrift, honesty, tolerance, civil
discipline and hard work?17


It was the old Puritan message, one which led him to conclude
that much of the Third World was largely responsible for its own
underdevelopment. This too was part of the frontier myth. For the
frontier was a civic space, a place where the lazy and slothful became
Americans through the challenge that it posed.


2. Parsons' work is also important in its claims for American
universalism. In claiming that the United States was the most modern
society in the world he was putting forward an idea that was popular
for much of the twentieth century. If you want to see your own future,
visit New Year, declared a confident Zbigniew Brzezinski in 1962.


Today we have moved away from that position. Smuel Eisenstadt
writes that from the very beginning history uncovered 'multiple
modernities'. 18 If Europe got there first, its model was not exported.
And the very first society to reject it was the United States – not any of


16 Dean Acheson, Morning and Noon, Boston: Houghton and Mifflin, 1965, p. 18.
17 George Kennan, The Cloud of Danger, New York: Little and Brown, 1979, p. 112.
18 Smuel Eisentstadt, 'Multiple Modernities', Daedalus 129:1 Winter 2000, p. 13.


159


CHRISTOPHER COKER


the Asian or Moslem countries whose rejection might have been
attributed to the existence of traditions distinct from those of Europe.
The break occurred in the 1820s/30s within Western civilisation itself.
It occurred in the New World. The crystalization of a distinctly different
pattern of modernity took place through a confrontational discourse
with Europe, especially England and France. Such confrontations were
to become characteristic of the ongoing discourse about modernity as
it expanded throughout the world. But we often forget that the first
revolt against Europe began in the United States . The very existence
of the republic is a reproach to Europe.


But Parson's comforting belief that the US represented the future
of all of us was in tune with one of the deepest impulses of American
political thought. It explains its implicit universalism. The conclusion
to which his analysis clearly pointed from the beginning was that the
development of American society in the modern era had of universal
significance in human history. And that for a particular reason.
Ideological differences notwithstanding, the United States had seen all
its enemies from Nazi Germany to Imperial Japan and most recently
the Soviet Union in terms of its own modernity. All were deemed to
be 'unmodern', though modern enough to be converted.


Although Parsons recognised the differences between modern
societies as different as the US and the Soviet Union, he considered
that they all displayed important common characteristics and belonged
in a technological, economic and socio-cultural sense to one world.


There was a convergence of socio-cultural development, as nearly
all societies reflect to varying degrees the industrial revolution, the
democratic revolution, and the educational revolution. It is, therefore,
only a slight exaggeration to say that all contemporary societies are
more or less modern. We should not make too much of the fact that
the US and the Soviet Union have had ideologies varying from older
Western European patterns.... The value content of these ideologies
should be regarded as specifications of the more general Western value
patterns of instrumental activism rather than departures from it.19


19 Parsons, Evolution of Societies, op. cit., p. 236.


160


THE CONTINUITY OF AMERICAN FOREIGN POLICY


As slogans, making the world safe for 'democracy' (1917-65)
or 'diversity', the rallying cry after 1965, they were inspired by
the implicit, if usually unstated, belief that its diverse enemies were
'unmodern'.


One explanation for this was the role of religion in what Parsons
calls 'the ideologies of social criticism and revolt . The United States,
unlike Western Europe, had a civic religion about which de Tocqueville
had written at length. The religious motif was uppermost in America's
discourse about itself. What social scientists such as Robert Bellah began
to recognise in the 1950s was that religion is not opposed to modernity:
it is modernity when it underwrites ‘a commitment to the source of
ultimate value'; when it enables societies to  re-value their traditions
and myths. But what distinguished American liberalism from both
fascism and communism was that it was not a substitute for religion.
To some extent even Imperial Japan developed a political religion in
the 1930's when Shinto nationalism and Zen Buddhism underpinned
the country's self-conscious ‘revolt against modernity': the title of a
conference the government convened in 1943.20


De Tocqueville himself had compared the French Revolution
to 'a religious revival calling it ‘a (new) species of religion'. After the
First World War there was an intensified revival of the pseudo-religious
strain in politics as fascist demagogues and communists alike spoke of
the 'regeneration',  reawakening and  rebirth of the nation. Communism
and fascism both caricatured the fundamental pattern of belief by
attributing sacredness to entire collectives such as class, nation or race,
which had already partly supplanted God as the object of mass
enthusiasm. These, in turn, became  a congregation of the faithful'
which required martyrdom. They spoke with an emotional power
best described by one willing Italian philosopher as 'the rape of the
soul'. All men had to do was make a quantum leap of faith.21


20 See Denis Washburn, The Dilemma of the Modern in Japanese Fiction, New Haven: Yale
University Press, 1995, p. 7t.


21 For a discussion of 'political religions' see Michael Burleigh, The Third Reich: a new history,
London: Macmillan, 2001, p. 1-9.


161


CHRISTOPHER COKER


The United States too, in a brief moment of its history, threatened
to become a political creed. Through McCarthyism an attempt was
made, writes Garry Wills, to turn the United States into a ‘ism'; to
punish Americans not only for acting out of character but thinking
un-American thoughts through the notorious Un-American Activities
Committee of the early 1950s.22 There was always a danger that the
country with its unique civic religion would become a political religion
itself – thus limiting its universal appeal as Soviet communism had
with its emphasis on ‘socialism in one country , and national socialism
which was always more nationalist than socialist. Its pluralistic polity
saved it from that fate.


3. The third element in Parson's model that accounts for the
continuity of US policy is the educational revolution. The importance
of universities was acknowledged by Lord Bryce back in the 1890s, as
well as their social agenda: to abolish the state of unhappiness. If only
for its symbolic importance, Wilson's Presidency is interesting: that a
former Princeton professor who also taught at Johns Hopkins should
draw on the work of a professor from the University of Wisconsin
was to be expected of the leader of a nation that treated its intellectual
class as an aristocratic elite.


In the second volume of Democracy and America De Tocqueville
showed how an aristocratic age was giving way to a democratic one.
But he also grasped how this was a very gradual process. The existence
of some kind of aristocratic order was still necessary to maintain some
of the freedoms of otherwise increasing democratic societies. The
modern age, writes John Lukacs, was marked by the co-existence of
aristocracy and democracy, something which has now ended.23 In the
United States that aristocracy was an academic elite. And Turner too
can be invoked here for he saw in America's academic elite a new social
group, one that did not form a separate class but could mediatebetween
the two classes: the bourgeoisie and the proletariat, and thus prevent
them from polarising American politics. In his 1910 commencement


22 Gary Wills.


23 John Lukacs, At the End of an Age, New Haven: Yale University Press, 2000, p. 13.


162


THE CONTINUITY OF AMERICAN FOREIGN POLICY


address to the University of Indiana he saw them as the bearers of
 memory, traditions and an inherited attitude towards life'. 24


The power of that elite was criticised in 1917 by the left wing
social critic Randolph Bourne in an article entitled ‘The War and the
Intellectuals'. In it he criticised the American intellectual community
for its uncritical support of Wilson's decision to take the United States
into the First World War. For a man who still retained an implacable
animus against war it was a bitter experience to see the unanimity with
which most American writers had rushed to support the war effort.
Indeed, not content with merely supporting the war they claimed to
have effectively willed it in the face of national indifference as to which
of the belligerent powers should prevail. 25


Looking back on the intellectual community's standing in
American life it is difficult to see how they could not have resisted the
wish to enter history on the terms of engagement Woodrow Wilson
staked out in 1917. It would be difficult to find any other modern
society whose intellectual class so evocatively captured the first
principles of American policy. Indeed what is striking about Nazi
Germany and the USSR is the absence of an intellectual elite that
actually shaped nazi or Soviet thinking once the movements came to
power. This was not true of the United States.


Here I would isolate the work of the three great liberal
philosophers at the turn of the twentieth century, Charles Peirce,
William James and John Dewey, all of whom formulated a special
US creed: 'the will to truth' (an intellectualised form of the will to
power), an all-encompassing march of American modernity. Of the
three philosophers James is perhaps the most interesting for his voice
and speech and even turn of phrase were all authentically American.
He deliberately employed such characteristic expressions as ‘cash value’
and  results and even ‘profits in order to bring his ideas within reach
of the 'man in the street . He spoke with a force and directness which


24 Munstow, Writing History, op. cit., p. 188.


25 Cited in Jon Glover/Jon Silkin, The Penguin Book of the First World War, London: Viking,
1989,  . 349-354.


163


CHRISTOPHER COKER


made his philosophy of pragmatism second nature to his fellow
citizens. 26


In James' philosophy of action, the first principle of which is
'purpose', there is a distinct echo of Wilsonian thinking. If our
experience, he argued, discloses an unfinished world, a world with a
future, with aspects which are still in the making, we must ask what
part we have in shaping that process. We cannot decide what is morally
good or bad until we have a moral order. But if we don't want such an
order in the first place we cannot be made to believe in what is good
or bad by rational argument. That we make moral distinctions and
take them seriously is decided by our will, not our intellect.


When Woodrow Wilson declared war on Germany in 1917 he
confidently asserted that our object is to vindicate the principles of
peace... we are glad to fight for the ultimate peace of the world.’27
The idea that war was being fought for peace was the ultimate
conclusion of America's historic mission to rid the world of tyrants
whether they took the form of eighteenth century kings or twentieth
century German gauleiters. It was only inevitable that later Soviet
commissars would be added to the list. In that sense the Cold War
was indeed a war, rather than an armed peace, for it could end in only
one outcome: the unconditional victory of one side, and the
unconditional surrender of the other.


James' second principle is  effort . Effort tells us that we are
free, that our will (or free-thinking) is capable of bringing about change.
We are not passive spectators but actors in our own history. It is not
enough, however, to await evidence that will confirm us in this opinion.
It we resolutely refuse, for example, to consider the possibility of God's


26 Similar thinking of course is to be found in Anglo-American thought. See J S Mill:


When men have realised that time has upset many fighting faiths, they may come to
believe even more than they believe the very foundations of their own conduct that the
ultimate good desired is better reached by free trade in ideas – for the best test of truth is the
power of the thought to get itself accepted in the competition and the market. (Cited by
Mary Midgeley, "Thickets of legal precedent", Times Literary Supplement, June 21, 2002, p. 11.)
27 Cited in Iriye, 'War as peace, peace as war' in Philip Windsor (ed) Experiencing the
Twentieth Century, Tokyo: Tokyo University Press, 1985, p. 36.


164


THE CONTINUITY OF AMERICAN FOREIGN POLICY


existence until we have proof of it we will fail to put ourselves in a
place where we may find proof, or where we may experience the reality
if it is there to be found. The 'cash value' of abstract ideas, James
declared, is such that they can only be known when lived through.
Only by wishing to believe in them (in the possibility of their existence
from the outset) will we be willing to act in ways that will put us in
the presence of them (if they are there to be found). And that may
require that at some point we fight our way into history.


Effort, of course, was endless in the twentieth century. 'It will
be our business', declared Woodrow Wilson when he took the United
States into the First World War, ‘to fight for a new era’. ‘All our lives ,
Dean Acheson told the American people in 1946, after the Wilsonian
order had collapsed and another war had been fought to punish those
held responsible for its failure,  the need for effort will always be with
us'. 28 There appeared to be no end to America's labours, only a constant
striving.


The final element in James philosophy of action is  will itself.
For effort would be of little avail if it were no more than a blind will
to power. Our efforts must be governed by our purposes and our
purposes, in turn, must be framed in the light of our beliefs. A belief
which has nothing to do with conduct is not a proper belief. Our
conduct, however, must be informed by ideas. In the end, we hold
our beliefs through our will to believe.29 Few American policymakers
of importance ever doubted the veracity of their convictions even in
the darkest moments of their history.


Like his equally famous brother who became a British subject
in 1916 in protest at America's failure to come into the war, William
James was representative of a specific elite that was largely English in
origin. Indeed, Randolph Bourne criticised it for ‘colonising American
foreign policy, for holding it hostage to British interests. But the social


28 Cited in T Smith, America's Mission: the United States and the worldwide struggle for
democracy, Princeton: N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1997, p. 137.
29 Bird and J E Smith, The Spirit of American Philosophy, Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1963. See also H Puttanam, 'William James' ideas', Raritan, 1989, v. 8, p. 27-44.


165


CHRISTOPHER COKER


basis (and thus popular appeal) of the intellectual class was broadened
in the 1930s by immigration from Eastern and Central Europe. With
the arrival of 300,000 or more intellectuals and academics – refugees
from Hitler's New Order – the United States moved to the centre of
European thought. It found itself the home of some of the great centres
of European intellectual life – the Vienna circle which influenced
thought on mathematics, linguistics and philosophy; the Institute of
Mathematics at Gottingen; most of the members of the Frankfurt
School; and almost the entire staff of the Berlin School of Politics.


The playwright Bertold Brecht recognised the significance of
this exodus from the beginning. “Immigration is the best school of
dialectics. Refugees were the keenest dialectitions”, he claimed in his
book Refugee Dialogues, for “they are refugees as a result of change and
their sole object of study is change”.30 The generation that escaped
from Germany and Central Europe in the 1930s was conscious of its
own importance in the conflict that was about to unfold. Many, like
Hannah Arendt, moved from philosophy to political theory, from a
life of contemplation to one of action in recognition of the fact that
in the twentieth century the  political had an urgency that could no
longer be denied. Their personal encounter with totalitarianism
demanded that the US commit itself to the defence of democracy
worldwide. That commitment, in turn, was aided by the political
language they forged. In Chicago Hans Morgenthau and Leo Strauss
did much to invent the language of American realism in the 1950s.
Arendt was the first to coin the term  totalitarianism'.


What the refugees succeeded in doing was to involve their
adopted country in a historic dialogue with the Old World from which
they had fled. In so doing they made their own unique contribution
to the dialectics of the western alliance that became the cornerstone of
American foreign policy after 1941. Indeed like Turner himself in 1919
many American historians in the early years of the Cold War began to
insist that there was no American history as such, only western history.


30 Cited Martin Jay, Permanent Exiles: essays on the intellectual migration from Germany to
America, New York: Columbia University Press, 1985, p. 28.


166


THE CONTINUITY OF AMERICAN FOREIGN POLICY


Challenged by the émigrés in their midst, they took the 'idea' of
America into the realm of western history, instead of creating a non-
western history for their readers as Turner had wanted. The frontier
was now the western world as a whole. Europe and America were not
so different. In the words of one distinguished historian the United
States and Europe were “moved by the same rhythm, stirred by the
same impulses and inescapably involved in the same crises". 31


CONCLUSION


Space does not permit speculation about the future but I would
end on one other note struck by Parsons. His final conclusion was
that America represented the future of all Western societies. Yet in the
relatively short space of time which has elapsed since Parsons completed
his study twenty-five years ago it is clear that America's principal allies
the European powers – have become increasingly critical of the
American model which contrasts so markedly with their own. Contrary
to the bold closing assertion he offered “for the idea of the post-
modern... is premature", 32 European societies have become post-
modern states pursuing what Robert Cooper, the British diplomat,
calls 'a post-modern foreign policy'.


In its refusal to follow its other Western partners down the
internationalist and transnational route (as evidenced by its apparent
'unilateralism') the United States will remain true to its own version
of modernity. But US foreign policy will become more exclusive than
inclusive. 'Exceptionalism (not exemplarism', or  redemptionism')
may well be the new ideological glue that holds it together. As Agnes
Heller observes, the frontier thesis has another message: one linked to
the major ethical power of North Americans: the idea of justice. Like
the constitution, the myth involves not distributive justice, but
retributive justice. And it is around the idea of competitive justice that


31 Cited Peter Novick, That Noble Dream: the  objectivity question and the American historical
profession, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988, p. 310.
32 Parsons, The Evolution of Societies, op. cit., p. 241.


167


CHRISTOPHER COKER


American capitalism and the justice system itself now revolves. Central
to both is the idea of penalty and reward: those who are successful are
rewarded; those who fail, fail in spectacular fashion. The Europeans
are increasingly critical of this model which departs so radically from
their own social democratic first principles. Whether the western alliance
 the seed of which was contained in Turner's 1919 paper – can survive
this critique is a moot question.


168


8


MODELOS ECONÓMICOS, REGÍMENES POLÍTICOS
Y POLÍTICA EXTERIOR ARGENTINA


Mario Rapoport y Claudio Spiguel


I. INTRODUCCIÓN


Un lugar común en los análisis sobre la política exterior argentina
desde mediados del siglo XX y hasta la década del '90 es el diagnóstico
sobre su forma errática, oscilante, con diversos conflictos internos en
torno a la misma. Estas oscilaciones y conflictos, al igual que en la
política económica, son contrastadas con la relativa “coherencia” y
aparente homogeneidad de la política exterior argentina en la etapa
fundacional de la economía y el estado moderno, desde el último tercio
del siglo XIX y hasta 1930 – o 1943 –, en lo que habría configurado
una verdadera “política de Estado”.1 Tal descripción, que a veces es
esgrimida como explicación, remite desde posturas neoliberales a la
exaltación de los sólidos vínculos de la Argentina con una gran potencia,
entonces Gran Bretaña, y ha fundamentado la política de alineamiento
con los EEUU durante la presidencia de Menem.


Es también frecuente que la explicación respecto de la presunta
incoherencia de la política exterior en el último medio siglo se remita
a la pronunciada discontinuidad de los regímenes políticos, desde la
vigencia del régimen peronista (1946-1955) y pasando por la alternancia
posterior de dictaduras militares – incluida la instaurada en 1976,
con las hondas transformaciones de la economía y sociedad argentina
que provocó - y precarios interregnos limitadamente democráticos,
de vigencia del régimen representativo y la constitución, cercenados


1 Ver por ejemplo, Cisneros, A. y Escudé, C. Historia general de las relaciones exteriores de la
República Argentina, 1era Parte, Buenos Aires, 2000.


169


MARIO RAPOPORT Y CLAUDIO SPIGUEL


desde su origen por proscripciones legales y tutelados por las FFAA,
hasta 1983.


Esta constatación de la relación entre “erratismo” de la política
exterior y falta de continuidad institucional, con alta variación de
regímenes políticos, es, sin embargo, insuficiente. Trascender su
superficialidad, evitando una explicación mecánica de causa-efecto,
requiere bucear en un tercer término: las condiciones de producción
de las diversas políticas exteriores, poniendo al descubierto que la propia
discontinuidad institucional ha sido a su vez expresión de agudos
conflictos sociopolíticos emergentes tanto entre la sociedad y el Estado
como en el interior del mismo Estado (en el seno de las clases y sectores
dirigentes del mismo) conflictos que se han expresado también en
pugnas y disputas por la política exterior del país. Por eso, investigar la
relación entre políticas exteriores y regímenes políticos en la Argentina
supone, además de enfocar los lazos entre política exterior y política
interna, analizar las transformaciones y vaivenes de los regímenes
políticos en su íntima y a veces contradictoria vinculación con la
naturaleza socio-histórica del Estado, el proceso de su formación y la
estructura económica de la sociedad. Esta estructura incluye las formas
de su inserción mundial a lo largo de los distintos períodos de la historia
argentina contemporánea.


En estas páginas abordaremos la relación entre regímenes políticos
y política exterior, ahondando en el análisis de ciertos períodos y
coyunturas que ponen de relieve aspectos esenciales del tema: la formación
del Estado argentino y la política exterior del régimen conservador; la
coyuntura de las guerras mundiales, con su entrelazamiento de política
interna y exterior y los cambios sociales y en el régimen político que
tuvieron lugar en esos años; el análisis de los golpes de Estado,
particularmente desde 1955 a 1976 y sus determinantes internacionales;
la última dictadura militar y su política exterior; la guerra de Malvinas
y, finalmente, la evolución del régimen constitucional argentino desde
1983 hasta el presente. Pero en ese análisis tendremos presente
especialmente los factores económicos y, particularmente, los tres
modos de acumulación principales en la historia argentina: el modelo
agroexportador (1880-1930), el de industrialización por sustitución


170


MODELOS ECONÓMICOS, REGIMENES POLÍTICOS Y POLÍTICA EXTERIOR ARGENTINA


de importaciones (1930-1975) y el rentístico-financiero (de 1976 al
presente), pues tuvieron una influencia decisiva en la evolución del
Estado y de los regímenes políticos y en la formulación de la política
internacional del país. Finalmente, intentamos no limitar el análisis a
regularidades formales, sino extraer conclusiones de largo plazo sobre
el tema que contribuyan también a desentrañar los dilemas del
atormentado presente argentino.


II. FORMACIÓN DEL ESTADO, Régimen OliGÁRQUICO E INSERCIÓN
INTERNACIONAL


El abordaje histórico pone de manifiesto que el proceso de
construcción y consolidación del Estado nacional argentino a partir de
mediados del siglo XIX, que culminó en la década del '80, fue correlato
y función de la consolidación de la estructura económica moderna y
de las relaciones internacionales privilegiadas con la Europa capitalista,
proceso en el que se configuró un país dependiente, receptor de las
inversiones de capital fundamentalmente británico, pero también
francés, alemán, belga y de otros orígenes, y exportador de productos
agropecuarios al mercado europeo.


Desde la génesis de la nación, en el proceso de la revolución de
mayo de 1810 y de la independencia argentina, se frustraron gran parte
de los contenidos democráticos y populares a los que aspiraban los
primeros patriotas. También, a través de las diversas guerras civiles que
enfrentaron a las provincias, y contrarrestando las fuerzas centrífugas
que vinculaban a las distintas regiones con los países vecinos a través de
circuitos mercantiles que existían desde la colonia, se fue afirmando el
rol hegemónico de la provincia de Buenos Aires, la más poderosa,
poseedora del puerto de ultramar. Se configuró así una economía basada
en el Litoral y Bs. As, especializada en la producción de cueros y carnes
saladas para la exportación a través de la cual los terratenientes realizaban
la renta del suelo, y subordinada a las relaciones comerciales con los
capitalistas europeos, sobre todo de Gran Bretaña y Francia,
introductores de manufacturas industriales. Tal hegemonía económica,
conjugada con el librecambismo portuario, consolidó los desequilibrios


171


MARIO RAPOPORT Y CLAUDIO SPIGUEL


regionales obturando las potencialidades productivas, agrícolas y
artesanales de las provincias interiores y limitando los impulsos a la
conformación de un mercado interno nacional sobre bases endógenas.


Tras la caída de Rosas en 1852 y la guerra civil entre los porteños
y la Confederación que agrupó a las provincias interiores, se afirmó,
desde 1862, la hegemonía porteña y su tendencia centralizadora y se
edificó progresivamente el Estado nacional como expresión de esa
hegemonía en una red de alianzas con diversas oligarquías provinciales.
Ese proceso tuvo su instrumento y expresión principal en la fuerza
militar, el ejército de línea, que fue subsumiendo o destruyendo a las
fuerzas armadas provincianas. 2


La centralización y edificación de las instituciones estatales
nacionales afirmaron en lo económico el rumbo agroexportador y
librecambista. En el plano político consolidaron la fachada de un
régimen constitucional calcado de las repúblicas representativas, pero
que, en coherencia con el régimen social predominante, se reveló como
instrumento oligárquico de dominio y hegemonía no sólo frente a los
sectores díscolos de las elites provincianas o fracciones marginales de
pequeños terratenientes, sino también contra los sectores populares,
en un principio rurales pero crecientemente urbanos. Recordemos que
entre 1860 y 1880 transcurre el período de la “prehistoria de una
embrionaria burguesía industrial y de una incipiente clase obrera
moderna, localizadas fundamentalmente en la ciudad de Buenos Aires.


La afirmación de este Estado oligárquico, liberal y antidemocrático,
fue así funcional a la consolidación y perpetuación del orden
terrateniente en las nuevas condiciones históricas de la expansión del
capitalismo mundial y se manifestó en una política exterior basada en
el librecambio y el establecimiento de fuertes vínculos mercantiles y
financieros con la Europa capitalista. Derrotados los otros proyectos
de organización nacional con centro en el interior, la consolidación de
un mercado interno nacional unificado se produce de modo
subordinado al interés agrario exportador y al mercado externo y sobre


2 Ver Oszlak, O, La formación del Estado argentino, Buenos Aires, 1997; Botana, N., El orden
conservador, Buenos Aires, 1985.


172


MODELOS ECONÓMICOS, REGIMENES POLÍTICOS Y POLÍTICA EXTERIOR ARGENTINA


la base de la penetración del capital extranjero europeo, que pasa a
controlar ramas claves de la economía (ferrocarriles, frigoríficos,
comercio de importación y exportación, etc.) en asociación con el poder
social dominante, condicionando a partir de entonces el desarrollo
capitalista del país. Ello se expresará en política exterior con una
orientación atlantista, de espaldas a las otras naciones de América
del Sur.


La Guerra de la Triple Alianza (1865-1870) fue, en muchos
sentidos, un hecho fundacional del Estado nacional argentino y de su
política exterior. La guerra enfrentó el desafío paraguayo, con su modelo
de desarrollo antagónico al que impulsaban los sectores hegemónicos
de las clases dirigentes argentinas y siendo considerado por éstas un
potencial foco de contagio respecto de núcleos provinciales y sectores
populares. Profundamente impopular en el país, significó un salto en
la represión de las últimas rebeldías provincianas, en la centralización y
la consolidación del ejército nacional y del poder del Estado y en las
relaciones financieras con Gran Bretaña, expresadas en el notable
incremento de la deuda pública con la que la Argentina entrará de
lleno en el mercado capitalista mundial.


Este fue, además, el prólogo de la afirmación de la soberanía
territorial del Estado, con la Conquista del Desierto de Roca de 1879-
80, verdadero genocidio de los pueblos originarios del sur de Buenos
Aires, la Patagonia y el Chaco argentinos. Consolidando las fronteras
en el plano estatal, esa “conquista significó simultáneamente en el
plano económico-social la afirmación del patrón latifundista de
apropiación del suelo y el consiguiente reforzamiento del poder social
y político de los terratenientes, especialmente bonaerenses, y de su
alianza con núcleos claves de las elites provincianas. Su corolario fue
también la subordinación final de los gauchos, los pastores criollos,
ahora sin frontera abierta donde obtener medios de vida propios y
sometidos definitivamente a las labores agropecuarias en las estancias.
El último acto del proceso es la federalización de la ciudad y puerto de
Buenos Aires, que si en su expresión jurídica aparece como la
culminación de la organización federal, consagra en los hechos,
conjuntamente con el enorme poder presidencial sancionado por la


173


MARIO RAPOPORT Y CLAUDIO SPIGUEL


Constitución, la supremacía incontestable de las autoridades nacionales,
contribuyendo al cercenamiento por décadas de las condiciones para
una genuina expresión de las autonomías provinciales.


En cuanto al régimen político, el “orden conservador fue la
expresión cristalina de la naturaleza de los intereses sociales que edificaron
ese Estado consagrando, por mecanismos formales e informales, la
exclusión de la participación política de la inmensa mayoría de la
población criolla y de las grandes oleadas de inmigrantes europeos que
llegaron por ese entonces al país. Contingentes poblacionales de los
que emergerán las nuevas fuerzas sociales subordinadas económica, social
y políticamente: la clase obrera urbana y rural, el campesinado agricultor,
vastas capas medias urbanas y, progresivamente, sectores de la burguesía
media urbana y rural.


Tal régimen político se expresó en una política exterior destinada
fundamentalmente a dar garantías a los inversores europeos, a asegurar
la financiación externa del Estado y a consolidar los mercados europeos
para los productos de una Argentina especializada en la producción
agroexportadora, con una base unilateral y precaria que en su rápido y
deformado crecimiento manifestaría pronto las restricciones que la
estructura económica y social imponía al desarrollo productivo
del país.


Los presupuestos de esa política exterior, atlantista y liberal, de
la Argentina “abierta al mundo” (y el mundo era la Europa en la etapa
del capital financiero), desde la gestación del Estado nacional, con la
presidencia de Mitre, dieron la espalda a América del Sur. Como lo
expresaron sus fundadores teóricos y prácticos implicaba la oposición
a toda política de alianzas permanente y afianzamiento de vínculos
económicos con los países vecinos, incluyendo el rechazo a iniciativas
de solidaridad interamericana frente a intervenciones o amenazas
extrarregionales (como el caso de la agresión española a las islas peruanas). 3
Cercenadas tendencias anteriores de búsqueda de una política americanista,


3 Ver Alberdi, Juan B., Escritos póstumos, T III: Política exterior de la República Argentina,
Buenos Aires, 1896; Salas, Hugo R., Una política exterior argentina, Comercio exterior e ideas
en sus orígenes y consolidación (1862-1914), Buenos Aires, 1987.


174


MODELOS ECONÓMICOS, REGIMENES POLÍTICOS Y POLÍTICA EXTERIOR ARGENTINA


las vigas maestras de la política exterior enunciadas más arriba
configuraron un verdadero “consenso” conservador que se manifestó a
través de distintas corrientes ideológicas. Una, predominante, de corte
“comercialista liberal, que evitaba la aparición de conflictos, y, como
la sombra al cuerpo, otra caracterizada por la “real politik del
nacionalismo territorial, que preconizaba políticas de fuerza frente a
los países vecinos (sobre todo con motivo de los diferendos limítrofes
heredados de la reciente formación de las naciones) y que se conjugaba
con la espiral armamentística, en un eco del “equilibrio europeo”.4
Dos caras de una misma moneda, ambas corrientes emergían del
consenso conservador europeísta y librecambista. Allí la guerra del
Paraguay vuelve a constituirse en un signo paradigmático de la
articulación de aquellas dos orientaciones. La guerra, hecho culminante
de toda política exterior, conjugó simultáneamente la búsqueda de la
más estrecha alianza con el capital europeo a la confrontación abierta
con el país hermano.


Estas dos caras de la política exterior conservadora tuvieron su
base en corrientes ideológicas diversas de la propia oligarquía, en la que
se conjugaron siempre el liberalismo cosmopolita con el tradicionalismo
que enfatizaba el hecho territorial, corrientes que expresaban tradiciones
históricas y pugnas entre distintas regiones: Buenos Aires, el Litoral, el
interior. Pero crecientemente, como en otros conflictos y pugnas en el
seno del régimen conservador, esas fisuras van reflejando la diversidad
de asociaciones con diferentes capitales y potencias europeas. El capital
de origen británico – hegemónico –, el francés y belga y, visiblemente,
desde principios del siglo XX, el alemán, austrohúngaro e italiano, con
sus inversiones directas y financieras pasan a constituir un pilar de la
estructura económica interna y, en asociación con diversas fracciones
locales, terratenientes y comerciales, del Estado. Tal asociación va
conformando núcleos de capitalistas intermediarios que adquieren su
expresión sociopolítica en las diversas camarillas y corrientes del partido
gobernante. En la medida que se agudiza la competencia internacional,
la pugna de distintas potencias por esferas de influencia y la carrera


4 Ver Paradiso, J, Debates y trayectoria de la política exterior argentina, cap. 1, Buenos Aires, 1993.


175


MARIO RAPOPORT Y CLAUDIO SPIGUEL


armamentista, que darán lugar a la Primera Guerra Mundial, la realidad
internacional adquiere su dimensión particular en la Argentina en la
disputa entre esas diversas corrientes de la elite por el control del Estado,
llave fundamental para encauzar la inserción internacional – económica,
política, estratégica-militar – del país. Disputas que se agudizan cuanto
más se fisura el “globalismo” del concierto europeo de la “belle epoque”,
en la primera década del siglo XX.


Este es un rasgo permanente de la inserción internacional
dependiente de la Argentina, que subtiende la historia de sus clases
dirigentes y del Estado a lo largo del siglo y es una de las variables,
junto con las contradicciones emergentes del conflicto social, para
analizar las pugnas dentro del Estado en términos de política económica
y de política exterior. Aún cuando durante períodos prolongados se
puede establecer el predominio de la conexión con una potencia
hegemónica, sobre todo en el plano económico, esta diversidad de
vínculos se vuelve relevante para analizar la historia política del país y
de su Estado, trascendiendo una óptica economicista. Volviendo a la
política exterior conservadora, frente a la hegemonía de los vínculos
con Gran Bretaña, las líneas de política exterior impulsadas, por ejemplo,
por el Canciller Zeballos en la primera década del siglo XX conjugaban
la "real politik y la carrera armamentista con las nuevas doctrinas en
boga, pero también fueron expresión de intereses más mercantiles en
los que se expresaba el avance de la influencia alemana en la economía
y en las clases dominantes argentinas frente a los sectores probritánicos
hegemónicos.5


Otro eje clave y duradero del “consenso” conservador en materia
de política exterior y que deviene de la asociación con Europa en los
marcos de la nueva competencia mundial, es su distancia y hasta
hostilidad frente a la política panamericana de los EEUU. Esta
tendencia se perfila desde la conferencia de Washington de 1889, con
la que el país del Norte promueve una unión aduanera continental en
función de ampliar su influencia más allá del Caribe y horadar, en


5 Cf. Paradiso, ibidem, p. 45.


176


MODELOS ECONÓMICOS, REGIMENES POLÍTICOS Y POLÍTICA EXTERIOR ARGENTINA


tanto potencia emergente, la hegemonía inglesa y europea sobre América
del Sur. En aquella ocasión la delegación argentina, compuesta por dos
futuros presidentes, (Manuel Quintana, abogado de los ferrocarriles
ingleses, y Roque Sáenz Peña, representante más adelante de la corriente
"modernista que dentro del conservadurismo fracturaría la hegemonía
de los sectores probritánicos en el gobierno) fue contundente; frente a
la "América para los americanos pronunciaron un nuevo lema: “Sea
América para la humanidad”. Esta línea de la política exterior
conservadora constituirá una realidad de larga duración como tendencia
dentro de la elite tradicional argentina. 6


Pese al desarrollo ulterior de los vínculos argentino-norteamericanos
y el creciente peso de las inversiones directas y financieras de aquel
origen en la economía argentina, incluyendo ramas claves de la
agroexportación, los EEUU no lograrían establecer vínculos estables
con sectores mayoritarios de la clase terrateniente, que realizaban la
renta del suelo exportando a los mercados europeos los productos
agropecuarios de clima templado, mientras que el país del Norte, salvo
breves coyunturas (por ejemplo las guerras) mantuvo cerrado su
mercado interno a las exportaciones argentinas e incluso se transformó
en un competidor de las mismas en el mercado mundial. Esto constituyó
un factor condicionante para la perduración de sólidos vínculos con
los intereses europeos, en los que se apoyaba la elite tradicional,
potenciando conflictos tanto más agudos cuanto más EEUU se
transformaba en la potencia hemisférica por excelencia y en una
superpotencia mundial.


En suma, el “consenso” oligárquico respecto de la política exterior
antes descripto, caracterizado por lo que Juan Carlos Puig llamó
"dependencia nacional”, es el resultado de relaciones asimétricas con
Gran Bretaña y Europa que tiene su sustento en una asociación de
intereses locales e internacionales interna a la sociedad y al Estado y en
la disputa entre ellos.


6 Ver McGann, T. F., Argentina, Estados Unidos y el sistema interamericano, Buenos
Aires, 1960.


177


MARIO RAPOPORT Y CLAUDIO SPIGUEL


Así. la conexión hegemónica con Gran Bretaña (con sólidas bases
en las inversiones en los ferrocarriles, frigoríficos y el sector financiero;
en el control del mercado inglés de carnes; y en la asociación con los
núcleos más poderosos de terratenientes y el comercio importador) se
desplegó y sostuvo siempre en conflicto, con los sectores pro franceses
primero (surgidos de antiguas conexiones mercantiles y financieras
anteriores a 1880 con el predominio de la exportación lanar) y, sobre
todo desde principios del siglo XX, frente al significativo avance del
capital alemán (finanzas, armamento, electricidad, agroexportación,
cultivos regionales) y de otras potencias de Europa continental (Austria-
Hungría, Italia). Tales pugnas se procesan en el plano estatal en el
Congreso (donde la cámara de Senadores es el ámbito de negociación
entre las distintas oligarquías provincianas) y dentro del partido
gobernante, en la confección de las fórmulas presidenciales de los
“gobiernos electores”, aunque pocas veces – aún en el caso de la posición
frente a los conflictos limítrofes – las discrepancias ponen en cuestión
los carriles fundamentales de la política exterior.


En 1902 el incidente del bombardeo a las costas de Venezuela
por flotas europeas de las potencias acreedoras, en función del cobro
de la deuda externa de ese país, encuentra al régimen conservador
relativamente unido. La Doctrina Drago, expresada en una
comunicación del canciller argentino a la Casa Blanca, contra el uso de
la fuerza en esos casos, que sienta un importante precedente en el cuerpo
antiintervencionista de la doctrina de política exterior argentina, refleja
el temor de uno de los estados más endeudados y se conjuga con la
intencionalidad de comprometer en esa posición a los Estados Unidos,
que ha comenzado a ejercer su política intervencionista y a desplegar
su influencia sobre el hemisferio.


En este período inicial del siglo XX, se gestan rasgos de largo
plazo en la vida política nacional. En los sectores populares, con la
compleja integración de los caudales inmigratorios, la honda repercusión
de los conflictos europeos y de los movimientos y revoluciones sociales
se potencia con el internacionalismo obrero anarquista y socialista y se
va entrelazando complejamente con las percepciones sobre la realidad
latinoamericana (el intervencionismo norteamericano, la Revolución


178


MODELOS ECONÓMICOS, REGIMENES POLÍTICOS Y POLÍTICA EXTERIOR ARGENTINA


Mexicana), manifestándose desde entonces la poderosa influencia
política e ideológica del escenario mundial en la sociedad argentina.7


Tal rasgo se revelará en la repercusión posterior de las guerras
mundiales, revoluciones populares y luchas antiimperialista, y en los
movimientos de solidaridad, (que como en el caso de la guerra civil
española, configuran las redes de “otras relaciones internacionales”, ajenas
al Estado pero de gran influencia en la vida política) y aparece como
contracara del cosmopolitismo dependiente de la elite conservadora
(que en las primeras décadas del siglo se combina sin conflicto con la
extrema xenofobia frente a un movimiento obrero con alta presencia
de los inmigrantes). A la vez este rasgo de la sociedad influirá de diversos
modos sobre las percepciones respecto de la realidad nacional de las
distintas fuerzas sociales y políticas y sobre las tomas de posición y
cuestionamientos respecto de la inserción internacional del país y la
política exterior del Estado.


El crecimiento del peso social de vastas capas medias urbanas y
también de una burguesía media urbana y rural, condicionada y a la
sombra de los intereses dominantes de la estructura agroexportadora,
se manifiesta rápidamente desde fines del siglo XIX en el
cuestionamiento, de carácter democrático, a la exclusión de la
representación política de las mayorías, condicionadas por el origen
inmigratorio de una parte de ellas y por el régimen de elecciones
manipuladas y de “opereta”, sostenidas en el caudillismo latifundista y
los usos precapitalistas en las zonas rurales y provincias y crecientemente
por la violencia comicial en las zonas urbanas.


Ese cuestionamiento al régimen conservador se condensa y
encauza en la formación y desarrollo de la Unión Cívica Radical. Esta
articula, tras su planteo democrático de regeneración institucional para
hacer posible la vigencia de la voluntad popular, a diversos y
heterogéneos sectores sociales, desde sectores terratenientes marginados
hasta peones rurales, incluyendo el creciente apoyo de las capas medias


7 Ver Rapoport M. y Crisorio B. C. The National State, communities of European origin
and Argentinian international policy in the first half of the XXth century. In: Savard P. y
Vigezzi B. (ed.), Multiculturalism and the History of International Relations from the 18hs
Century up to the Present, p. 244-268.


179


MARIO RAPOPORT Y CLAUDIO SPIGUEL


y reflejando en su seno el peso de sectores de burguesía media, sobre
todo rural. Con el liderazgo de Hipólito Yrigoyen se afirma, frente a
otras corrientes conciliadoras, una estrategia de cuestionamiento, aún
reducido al plano político, del conjunto del régimen conservador y sus
instituciones, estrategia que se expresaba en el abstencionismo electoral
y la organización de levantamientos cívico-militares, sucesivamente
derrotados.8


III. GUERRAS MUNDIALES, CAMBIOS POLÍTICOS Y POLÍTICAS EXTERNAS
MÁS AUTONÓMICAS


Los periodos de las dos guerras mundiales constituyen coyunturas
privilegiadas para el análisis de la relación entre la política exterior y los
conflictos políticos internos, incluyendo importantes cambios en los
regímenes políticos. No es por casualidad que los dos grandes
movimientos políticos de base popular, que cuestionaron en mayor o
menos medida el poder de las clases dominantes tradicionales, y
expresaron y abrieron procesos de cambio social y reforma política,
hayan ascendido al gobierno bajo los influjos de tales coyunturas: (en
el contexto de la Primera Guerra, el radicalismo, y como resultado de
los procesos internos generados por la Segunda, el peronismo),
constituyéndose a partir de entonces en los dos grandes cauces de
expresión electoral de las mayorías populares.


Los dos grandes conflictos internacionales han sido un poderoso
condicionante del proceso político interno, acelerándose en esas
coyunturas tendencias de largo plazo y agudizándose el conjunto de las
contradicciones sociales: contribuyeron a fracturar a las elites
tradicionales, llevando a su extremo las disputas entre distintas corrientes
por el control del poder y generando fisuras en el aparato del Estado
que debilitaron el control político de las clases dominantes sobre el
conjunto de la población. Al mismo tiempo las guerras mundiales
aceleraron cambios económicos, sociales e ideológicos que potenciaron


8 Cf. Tulchin, J. A., La Argentina y los Estados Unidos, Historia de una desconfianza, Buenos
Aires, 1990, p. 114-115.


180


MODELOS ECONÓMICOS, REGIMENES POLÍTICOS Y POLÍTICA EXTERIOR ARGENTINA


la actividad de sectores excluidos tradicionalmente del poder político,
lo que a su vez debilitó la hegemonía de los sectores dirigentes y reforzó
sus disensos y pugnas.


Con la Primera Guerra el “consenso oligárquico, ya fisurado
por las disputas antes reseñadas, termina por romperse. La declaración
de la neutralidad argentina frente a la guerra mundial por el conservador
Victorino de la Plaza, una neutralidad “pasiva”, era funcional a la
hegemónica conexión con Gran Bretaña cuya diplomacia aceptaba esta
posición en tanto garantizaba el normal funcionamiento de las
relaciones comerciales bilaterales. A su vez fue defendida por el espectro
pro alemán del conservadurismo con un acrecentado peso de la
economía y el control de palancas del Estado. Una posición que
garantizaba la continuidad de las relaciones con Europa y bajo la cual
proseguía el sordo conflicto por el predominio en el poder. Al mismo
tiempo la neutralidad fue cuestionada desde el inicio por las corrientes
pro francesas y pro belgas del conservadurismo en una campaña político-
ideológica en la que se enarbolaba la defensa de la “civilización y la
libertad frente al militarismo prusiano”. A ese cuestionamiento se sumó
desde 1917, con la entrada de EEUU en la guerra, la ofensiva
diplomática que Washington proyectó sobre todo el continente.


Las discusiones sobre la posición internacional del país cuyo
escenario más visible era el ámbito parlamentario, vuelven evidente y
potencian a un nuevo nivel la división entre distintas camarillas del
establishment oligárquico y se entrelazan con los disensos frente al
rumbo político interno, en particular frente al desafío del radicalismo
yrigoyenista. El monolitismo conservador se quiebra respecto de la
táctica a adoptar: Abrir el juego electoral con la vigencia de la Ley
Sáenz Peña de 1912 (que consagraba el voto universal masculino, secreto
y obligatorio) eligiendo el “mal menor”, sobre la base de cooptar al
radicalismo y cerrar el camino a su insurreccionalismo que desde los
años anteriores, aún por carriles separados, podía conjugarse
peligrosamente con las rebeliones obreras y campesinas, o su alternativa,
mantener sin fisuras el régimen oligárquico en función de prevenir un
curso de “subversión” social total. La oposición radical cabalga sobre
esta fractura entre distintos sectores conservadores (el conservadurismo


181


MARIO RAPOPORT Y CLAUDIO SPIGUEL


de la provincia de Buenos Aires asociado al ferrocarril inglés y el ala
modernista que busca el aval radical para horadar desde el gobierno la
hegemonía pro inglesa). En 1916, en las primeras elecciones
presidenciales bajo la nueva ley electoral, estas fisuras contribuyen a
impedir en el Colegio Electoral una única candidatura conservadora
que cierre el acceso a la presidencia de Yrigoyen, triunfante en las urnas.


Así, por un lado, el yrigoyenismo ha arriado su bandera del
descabezamiento de todas las instituciones del régimen conservador
como condición para su participación electoral. Pivoteando sobre las
contradicciones interoligárquicas, su participación final en las elecciones
de 1916, motorizada por el episodio de la “fiebre electoralista desatada
en el partido a partir de la concesión de la ley Sáenz Peña, le permiten
el acceso a la presidencia en los marcos de un edificio institucional del
Estado (FF.AA, Parlamento, burocracia y Poder Judicial, gobiernos
provinciales, etc.) que se conserva intacto y bajo control de las clases
dominantes de terratenientes y grandes capitalistas intermediarios de
los capitales extranjeros, un aparato estatal moldeado en función de
esos intereses hegemónicos en la economía y la sociedad. Este hecho
marcará, junto con la insuficiencia del programa radical para una
transformación de la base económica agroexportadora, los límites de
la reforma política e institucional abierta en 1916. Ello se manifestará
con crudeza en el golpe militar de 1930, verdadera restauración
oligárquica en la que el Estado elimina las instituciones representativas
y, por muchos años, la expresión de la voluntad popular.


Al mismo tiempo el acceso de Yrigoyen a la presidencia en 1916
implicó y generó importantes cambios políticos, incluyendo la política
exterior. El hecho de que estos cambios, aún en las condiciones
limitativas antes expuestas, se produjeran en el contexto de las
oportunidades abiertas por el extremo fraccionamiento de las elites
oligárquicas generado por la guerra y las consiguientes fisuras que
engendró en el dominio estatal hace visible una realidad de larga
duración: el carácter extremadamente restrictivo y antidemocrático del
Estado argentino, coherente con los estrechos marcos que una estructura
económica agudamente dependiente impone al desarrollo social y por
ende, con la incapacidad de los intereses económicos y sociales


182


MODELOS ECONÓMICOS, REGIMENES POLÍTICOS Y POLÍTICA EXTERIOR ARGENTINA


dominantes para generar un consenso social duradero y suficientemente
extendido que hiciera posible la plena vigencia de las instituciones de
la democracia representativa.


La guerra y sus efectos sobre la sociedad nacional, (crisis,
contracción agrícola, reducción del ingreso de capitales e importaciones,
tenue proceso industrial sustitutivo de las mismas, debilitamiento de
las relaciones de dependencia) desnudaron ante la percepción de vastos
sectores sociales la extremada vulnerabilidad y dependencia de la
economía argentina al tiempo que generaron un mayor espacio para
las fuerzas sociales partidarias de mayor autonomía política y económica
de la nación. Así esa coyuntura favorece el desarrollo de corrientes del
pensamiento que se expresan en el nacionalismo popular, lo que se
manifestará en la política exterior Yrigoyenista.


En su primer gobierno mantiene intransigentemente la
neutralidad del país frente a la oposición interna y de los EEUU, dota
a la neutralidad de un carácter “activo”, cuestionando los fundamentos
de la guerra entre las grandes potencias. Ello se manifiesta en iniciativas
diplomáticas como el impulso a un congreso de países neutrales del
continente, iniciativa que naufraga por la oposición de EEUU.
Terminada la contienda bélica y, enfrentando incluso a la corriente
conservadora del partido, graficada en las posiciones del futuro
presidente Alvear, retira a la delegación argentina de la Sociedad de
Naciones sobre la base de la reivindicación de principios universalistas
basados en la igualdad de las naciones, tanto las victoriosas como las
derrotadas, grandes o pequeñas (manteniéndose la Argentina al margen
de aquella organización con hegemonía anglofrancesa hasta la década
del '30). Los aspectos autonomistas en política exterior de Yrigoyen
aprovechan en la posguerra la rivalidad mundial y en el escenario
argentino entre EEUU y Gran Bretaña y se esgrimen fundamentalmente
en relación al hegemonismo e intervencionismo de Washington en el
hemisferio, mientras la política exterior respecto de Gran Bretaña y
Europa mantiene un bajo perfil compatible con el peso económico de
esos vínculos y su base en núcleos privilegiados de la elite tradicional.
La literatura de origen fundamentalmente anglosajón que
conceptualiza esta política como “aislacionista” escamotea el hecho,


183


MARIO RAPOPORT Y CLAUDIO SPIGUEL


que es también una tendencia observable a lo largo del siglo en la política
exterior argentina, de que las corrientes autonomistas en el plano
diplomático respecto de las grandes potencias, y, en particular en el
caso reseñado respecto de EEUU, se conjugan con otros principios
universalistas opuestos a los “marcos globalistas hegemónicos y se
manifiestan en una tendencia latinoamericanista en la política exterior
de gobiernos que con mayor o menor alcance representan a fuerzas
económicas y sociales cuyo desarrollo choca con los marcos
dependientes de la economía y el Estado, fuerzas cuya debilidad
económica se conjuga con una fuerza política derivada del apoyo popular
y no del control tradicional del aparato del Estado.


Estos cambios en la política exterior en las presidencias de
Yrigoyen son simultáneos con una democratización de la vida política
interna. La mayor vigencia de las libertades democráticas favorece el
desarrollo y auge de los movimientos sociales: el movimiento obrero,
de los chacareros y en las capas medias cuyo exponente más
significativo es el de la Reforma Universitaria de 1918 –. Ello se combina
con el papel de arbitraje que el gobierno intenta reservar al Estado
en los conflictos obrero – patronales y frente a las grandes empresas
de propiedad extranjera. Al mismo tiempo los límites en esta
democratización, como en la política exterior, surgen de la continuidad,
sin grandes cuestionamientos, de la estructura agroexportadora y del
poder social y estatal que la reproduce: esto se refleja en las sangrientas
represiones, particularmente al movimiento obrero (Semana Trágica
de 1919, la Patagonia sangrienta de 1921-22) bajo presión de los
intereses terratenientes y de sus socios extranjeros y cuando tales
movimientos desbordan los límites del “arbitraje” gubernamental.


Con la Segunda Guerra Mundial se reeditan de modo más nítido
y en un plano superior las tendencias ya analizadas: las fracturas en el
seno del régimen político conservador y del Estado y el desarrollo de
cambios económicos y sociales que encuentran nuevas expresiones en
el plano político, generando agudos conflictos e incluso un cambio de
régimen. El nuevo conflicto bélico internacional, signado por


9 Rock, D., El radicalismo argentino (1890-1930), Buenos Aires, 1977.


184


MODELOS ECONÓMICOS, REGIMENES POLÍTICOS Y POLÍTICA EXTERIOR ARGENTINA


dramáticas connotaciones ideológicas y morales que no tuvo el primero,
encuentra a la Argentina en circunstancias de cambio económico y
social. Más agudamente que en 1914-1918, el proceso de la lucha por
la política exterior potencia el proceso político interno que a la vez se
expresa en esa lucha, llegando ambos planos a confundirse.


Nuevamente es la posición neutral del país un disparador de la
conflictividad interna e internacional. A posteriori del golpe de Estado
de 1930, y desde 1932, el gobierno está en manos de la oligarquía
conservadora a través de un régimen, el de la “democracia fraudulenta”,
que conserva la fachada parlamentaria y constitucional pero se asienta
primero en las proscripciones y luego en la generalización e
institucionalización de los mecanismos del fraude en las compulsas
electorales, tanto más violentos y evidentes cuanto más se ha complejizado
la sociedad argentina con la industrialización y el desarrollo urbano.


Al comenzar la guerra la posición de neutralidad no genera
mayores conflictos dentro de la elite apareciendo como el corolario
lógico del "consenso dentro de la “Concordancia gobernante
(conservadores, radicales antirygoyenistas, socialistas de derecha). Bajo
tal consenso se ha perpetuado la hegemonía de la conexión
angloargentina y de los núcleos sociopolíticos afines a la misma, (con
la incorporación de Argentina a la Sociedad de Naciones), núcleo
hegemónico que ha convivido con una renovada presencia de corrientes,
minoritarias pero influyentes, proalemanas y profascistas en el
establishment y también con corrientes liberales, modernistas, que en
los últimos años han buscado una mayor complementación económica
con los EEUU, (en los marcos del proceso de industrialización
sustitutiva), pese a que la política exterior conservadora se ha manifestado
durante la década del ‘30 en posiciones agudamente discrepantes con
la estrategia panamericana de los EEUU, a través de confrontaciones
diplomáticas que revelan la fuerte conexión con Gran Bretaña y Europa.
Sin embargo, hasta 1941 la posición neutral del gobierno coincide
con la idéntica posición norteamericana, cuenta con el sustancial apoyo
inglés y es defendida por los partidarios del Eje.


Es en ese año, tras la consolidación del poder alemán en Europa,
la invasión a la Unión Soviética y sobre todo el bombardeo a Pearl


185


MARIO RAPOPORT Y CLAUDIO SPIGUEL


Harbour y el ingreso de EEUU en la guerra, que el conflicto interno se
desata y potencia la crisis del conservadurismo. La ofensiva hemisférica
de Washington en pro de la ruptura de relaciones con el Eje choca en la
Conferencia de Río de Janeiro de 1942 con el neutralismo conservador
del presidente Castillo y el Canciller Ruiz Guiñazú. Posición en la que
se atrincheran por un lado los sectores anglófilos con el apoyo de los
intereses británicos dentro del país y la comprensión del Foreign Office
y, por el otro lado, las corrientes proalemanas y proeje dentro de la
elite tradicional, con peso en las fuerzas armadas. Al mismo tiempo, la
corriente liberal del conservadurismo, confluyendo con la posición pro-
aliada mayoritaria de la oposición democrática y estimulada por la
oposición norteamericana al gobierno de Castillo y el consiguiente
conflicto argentino-norteamericano, pasa progresivamente a cuestionar
la neutralidad, ligando el triunfo de la causa aliada y el alineamiento de
la Argentina con ella a las promesas de una democratización de la vida
política argentina. Aunque estos núcleos no logran posiciones
hegemónicas en el gobierno de Castillo contribuyen a horadar a la
coalición conservadora. El consenso interno a la elite tradicional se
fractura. Como hemos señalado en otros textos tal fractura, manifestada
en la opción entre la neutralidad y las posiciones pro-aliadas, revela en
realidad, de modo particular, un episodio agudizado de la rivalidad
anglo-norteamericana por esferas de influencia en la economía y el
Estado argentino, una rivalidad que hace posible el mayor activismo
de los sectores proeje, en realidad más débiles y minoritarios en su
fuerza económica y en el Estado. 10


Tal crisis de hegemonía corroe al conservadurismo y es el escenario
del golpe militar de 1943, en el que las FFAA vienen a garantizar la
continuidad del Estado clausurando la fachada constitucional
parlamentaria fraudulenta. Pero este no es el prólogo de la resolución
de esta crisis de hegemonía sino de su reedición en nuevas condiciones.


En las condiciones de la guerra mundial, las fracturas en la elite
y el Estado se manifiestan también agudamente en las propias fuerzas


10 Ver Rapoport, M, ¿Aliados o neutrales? La Argentina frente a la Segunda Guerra Mundial,
Buenos Aires, 1988; Rapoport, M, Gran Bretaña, Estados Unidos y las clases dirigentes argentinas,
1940-1945, Buenos Aires, 1981.


186


MODELOS ECONÓMICOS, REGIMENES POLÍTICOS Y POLÍTICA EXTERIOR ARGENTINA


armadas, reserva del mismo. La ratificación de la neutralidad por la
dictadura militar es sustentada en el predominio inicial de las corrientes
proalemanas, así como en el continuado peso de los intereses británicos
y también en el desarrollo de diversos sectores nacionalistas en el ejército,
desarrollo estimulado por la industrialización y la guerra. Éstas
esgrimirán aquella posición diplomática como signo de independencia
frente a la hostilidad y la política de sanciones, diplomáticas y
económicas, de los EE UU.


A la vez el conflicto en torno a la política exterior, con el desarrollo
de la guerra va dejando de vincularse al destino de la misma, ya
determinado a favor de la causa aliada, y es crecientemente expresión
del conflicto bilateral entre Argentina y EEUU. En este contexto, rota
ya la neutralidad en enero de 1944, se fortalece en el seno del gobierno
militar la figura del Coronel Perón y su corriente, que disputa la
hegemonía del ejército a los sectores del nacionalismo “duro”,
oligárquico y tradicionalista, y va articulando una política de reformas
sociales y alianza con los sindicatos, con postulados nacionalistas e
industrialistas.


La emergencia de Perón y su política en el seno del gobierno
militar contribuye a polarizar a la sociedad. Mientras importantes
sectores obreros y populares van depositando en su figura las esperanzas
de soberanía popular, independencia nacional y justicia social, la
oposición democrática sitúa el camino de la democratización del país
en el derrocamiento del gobierno militar y en particular en la oposición
a la figura de Perón, cuya importancia crece a lo largo del año '44 y
'45. A este planteo se irán sumando rápidamente importantes
contingentes de las clases dominantes tradicionales, hasta poco antes
partidarias de la neutralidad en la guerra y principales beneficiarias del
régimen conservador, y el activismo opositor converge con los
postulados de la política norteamericana frente al régimen militar. 11


En realidad ya la discusión sobre política exterior (aliados o
neutrales, o mejor, democracia o fascismo), encubre otra polarización


11 Rapoport, M., Los partidos políticos y la Segunda Guerra Mundial. In: El Laberinto,
op. cit., p. 121-190.


187


MARIO RAPOPORT Y CLAUDIO SPIGUEL


interna. La Argentina ha dejado de ser neutral en enero de 1944.
Negociaciones, primero secretas y luego abiertas, con EEUU, implican
el levantamiento de las sanciones y reflejan el predominio de Perón en
las decisiones del gobierno de Farrell. En acuerdo con la invitación
formulada por la Conferencia de Chapultepec, el gobierno militar
declara en marzo de 1945 la guerra al Eje, un mes después que otros
seis países americanos (Chile, Ecuador, Perú, Venezuela, Uruguay y
Paraguay), en una decisión vinculada al diseño del sistema internacional
de la posguerra en la Conferencia de San Francisco y a los acuerdos
norteamericano-soviéticos de Yalta, lo que desmiente la versión de que
fue una medida meramente oportunista del gobierno argentino. 12 Sin
embargo, este es el prólogo de la agudización de la ofensiva de la
diplomacia norteamericana, graficada en la actividad del embajador
Spruille Braden de oposición al gobierno militar y a Perón durante su
estancia en Buenos Aires, de mayo a septiembre. Sobre la base de sus
acusaciones de complicidad con las potencias del eje, esta ofensiva
congrega en torno suyo a toda la oposición, incluyendo a los núcleos
más poderosos de terratenientes y del establishment, que como lo
demuestra su historia anterior, se alinean en la hora con Braden más
por temor a Perón y a los cambios sociopolíticos que representa que
por amor a los EEUU. También la oposición de los partidos democráticos
busca el apoyo de los Estados Unidos contra el “nazi peronismo”.


En la segunda mitad del año '45, ya frustrados otros conatos de
recambio al interior del gobierno militar alentados por la oposición y
la embajada norteamericana, la ofensiva opositora busca el desalojo de
Perón del gobierno, lográndolo el 9 de octubre, planteándose incluso
la exigencia de la entrega del poder a la Corte Suprema de Justicia.
Pero el 17 de octubre un vasto movimiento obrero y popular en Buenos
Aires y otras provincias del país, con cierto grado de espontaneidad
pero encauzado y dirigido por los partidarios de Perón, reclama la
libertad del dirigente y la defensa de las conquistas sociales y fuerza un


12 Rapoport, M., Argentina y la Segunda Guerra Mundial, mitos y realidades. In: Estudios
Interdisciplinarios de América Latina y el Caribe, Tel Aviv, Vol. 6, $n^{\circ}$ 1, enero-junio de 1995,
p. 5-21; Humphreys, R.A., Latin America and the Second World War, 1942-1945, University
of London, 1982.


188


MODELOS ECONÓMICOS, REGIMENES POLÍTICOS Y POLÍTICA EXTERIOR ARGENTINA


nuevo cambio en la relación de fuerzas dentro del ejército logrando la
reposición de su líder, en un proceso que agudiza aún más la crisis del
Estado, de los sectores tradicionalmente dominantes y también del
propio régimen militar, y genera la convocatoria a elecciones de febrero
de 1946.


En ellas se enfrenta a Perón todo el espectro político anterior
unido, desde dirigentes conservadores connotados hasta el partido
comunista, expresando un fugaz y tardío episodio de la alianza
antifascista de la guerra. La Unión Democrática es respaldada en su
campaña por el Departamento de Estado norteamericano, con el Blue
Book donde se denunciaban las presuntas vinculaciones de los gobiernos
argentinos con los países del Eje. Su programa plantea incluso reformas
democráticas de carácter avanzado pero significativamente carece de
toda definición respecto de la industrialización del país.


Por otro lado, se dibuja una nueva coalición, aún informalmente
articulada en torno a la figura de Perón, con el aval de los sindicatos
bajo su influencia, que busca el apoyo de los industriales y presenta la
candidatura peronista como garantía de defensa de la soberanía nacional
frente a la ingerencia extranjera (Braden o Perón). La actividad de la
diplomacia norteamericana dio un sesgo antiimperialista a la campaña
presidencial de 1946 y fue un elemento decisivo para el triunfo electoral
de Perón.


Dos concepciones en torno a la democratización política se
enfrentaron, articuladas ambas con opuestas posiciones respecto del
conflicto diplomático con los EEUU y sobre la inserción internacional:
atada una de ellas al apoyo de Estados Unidos y a la integración al
sistema internacional de la posguerra, que, presumían sus promotores
locales, habría de prolongar la Gran Alianza de la guerra echando los
cimientos de un nuevo orden global; ligada la otra al planteo de mayor
autonomía nacional, bajo postulados nacionalistas-industrialistas.


Encontró así expresión particular y salida política, largamente
demorada por el carácter extremadamente restrictivo del Estado
argentino y del régimen político conservador emergente del golpe de
1930, la polarización económica y social que resultó del proceso de
industrialización sustitutiva de importaciones a partir del agotamiento


189


MARIO RAPOPORT Y CLAUDIO SPIGUEL


del “modelo agroexportador en el período de entreguerras, con la crisis
del '29, y los consiguientes cambios en la estructura social. Así en el
trasfondo del conflicto político, se decidía el rumbo económico y la
inserción internacional de la Argentina en la posguerra. Con el peronismo
triunfa el proyecto reformista de prolongar la industrialización
sustitutiva, sobre la base de la expansión del mercado interno, vía
redistribución del ingreso, y la protección del Estado, que hereda los
instrumentos del intervencionismo conservador de los años ‘30 y los
amplia con la política de nacionalizaciones de servicios públicos, crédito
industrial y controles financieros y del comercio exterior. Los intereses
económico-sociales que se expresan a través del nuevo movimiento
populista y alcanzan el control del gobierno conllevan la génesis de un
nuevo régimen político y también, con su “tercera posición”, un nuevo
tipo de política exterior. 13


El triunfo electoral del peronismo fue posible sobre la base de
los cambios políticos internos: el nuevo rol de la industria liviana en la
estructura económica del país; la fuerte base de apoyo obrera y popular
que el gobierno capitalizó en el terreno electoral y en la movilización
política; y el cuerpo de reformas sociales que implicaron una
pronunciada redistribución del ingreso y se compatibilizaban, a través
de la expansión del mercado interno, con el objetivo industrialista de
expandir hasta el límite la sustitución de importaciones.


El nuevo gobierno buscó definir una nueva inserción internacional
del país en el mundo bipolar creado por la guerra fría a través de la
llamada Tercera Posición, por la cual “se pretendía balancear el peso
considerable de los EEUU, procurando un mayor protagonismo en
América Latina, consolidando la tradicional conexión con Europa y
estableciendo vínculos diplomáticos con el bloque socialista, aunque
sin que esto significase abandonar la alineación a Occidente". 14


13 Ver Rapoport, My Spiguel, C., Estados Unidos y el peronismo. La política norteamericana
en la Argentina, 1949-1955, Buenos Aires, 1994; Rapoport, M, Tres momentos de la
política exterior argentina. In: Tiempo de crisis, Vientos de cambio, Argentina y el poder global,
Buenos Aires, 2002,  . 159-161.


14 Idem, "Tres momentos de la política exterior argentina", p. 159-160.


190


MODELOS ECONÓMICOS, REGIMENES POLÍTICOS Y POLÍTICA EXTERIOR ARGENTINA


Ello se articulaba con el complejo de fuerzas económicas
emergentes del proceso de industrialización que caracterizaron al
populismo peronista, su nacionalismo y su política exterior. Fuerzas
económicas estructural e históricamente débiles (lo que explica también
el grado de autoritarismo del gobierno que las expresaba), que en aquella
etapa se expandieron a través del proceso de reformas económicas y
sociales, capitalizando el apoyo popular y dejando una honda huella
política, social y también económica, con la expansión de la industria
nacional mercadointernista, de las economías regionales y del área
capitalista de Estado. Aspectos todos sin los cuales no se pueden explicar
las convulsivas dos décadas siguientes.


IV. GOLPES DE ESTADO, INESTABILIDAD INSTITUCIONAL Y PUGNAS
POR LA INSERCIÓN INTERNACIONAL DEL PAÍS


Los límites alcanzados por las reformas peronistas en la estructura
económica dependiente y donde predominaban todavía los sectores
económicos tradicionales, la debilidad de los nuevos núcleos empresarios
expandidos bajo el proceso de industrialización, y la subordinación de
las fuerzas sindicales al aparato de gobierno, lo que acentuaba sus
tendencias autoritarias, hicieron posible también el derrocamiento del
mismo, pese a la perdurable fuerza política del movimiento peronista.
No obstante, las transformaciones operadas y el hecho de que el
peronismo alcanzó a ejercer un grado de control sobre palancas claves
del Estado, a la hora de la verdad, el golpe militar de 1955 demostró
que el poder del Estado, como en 1930, respondió a los intereses
tradicionales, unificadas sus diversas corrientes en desalojar al peronismo
e iniciar una nueva y dramática etapa en la vida argentina.


Con la “Revolución Libertadora” que derrocó al segundo gobierno
peronista se inicia una etapa de aguda inestabilidad institucional en la
vida política argentina, caracterizada por una sucesión de gobiernos
civiles precarios, golpes de Estado y dictaduras militares, hasta 1983.


A través de estos episodios se fue afirmando la centralidad de las
fuerzas armadas en la vida política del país operando no sólo como
reserva del poder del Estado sino crecientemente como brazo político,


191


MARIO RAPOPORT Y CLAUDIO SPIGUEL


el “partido militar”, de un poder económico y social concentrado, el
de las elites agroexportadoras y de grandes empresarios asociados al
capital extranjero. Las políticas económicas, sociales e internacionales
que permitían la reproducción de esos intereses dominantes en la
economía y la sociedad se volvieron, en aquella etapa de la historia
argentina, incompatibles con la vigencia de la constitución y el
funcionamiento normal de las instituciones representativas emergentes
del sufragio universal. Al mismo tiempo, es a través de los gobiernos
de facto como se despliegan a fondo políticas neoliberales que pugnan
por una reinserción dependiente de la Argentina en el mercado mundial
de un modo compatible con los intereses mencionados, que en aquel
período buscan todavía aprovechar el mercado interno industrial
expandido en las décadas anteriores e incluso exportar manufacturas.


Como en 1930, desde 1955 en adelante se pueden discernir tres
órdenes de propósitos que en proporción diversa acicatean la actividad
de las fuerzas cívicas y militares que motorizan los golpes de Estado:
1) La necesidad de clausurar cualquier expresión de la voluntad popular
suprimiendo las libertades democráticas, sindicales y las garantías
constitucionales para poder ejercer sin mediaciones el poder coercitivo
del Estado a fin de impedir la contestación real o potencial de amplios
sectores de la población frente a las políticas antes expuestas.
2) Igualmente, la proscripción del peronismo, a fin de retrotraer sus
reformas sociales y debilitar el poder sindical a partir de la “revolución
libertadora de septiembre de 1955. 3) Y, finalmente, en el golpe del
24 de marzo de 1976, el objetivo de tronchar de raíz, bajo el pretexto
del combate al terrorismo urbano, el auge del movimiento popular,
que con fuerte protagonismo de obreros industriales y amplios sectores
medios había eclosionado desde el Cordobazo de 1969 y otros estallidos
posteriores a través de diversas expresiones sociales y políticas, algunas
de características revolucionarias.


Se buscaba asimismo, ejercer sin mediaciones el control de las
instituciones gubernamentales, desalojando de ellas a fuerzas proclives
al nacionalismo económico que, como el peronismo (1973-1976) o
el radicalismo del presidente Illia (1963-1966), pugnaban por seguir
desarrollando políticas industrialistas mercadointernistas y autonomistas


192


MODELOS ECONÓMICOS, REGIMENES POLÍTICOS Y POLÍTICA EXTERIOR ARGENTINA


en el plano internacional. Gobiernos que sin atinar a solucionar las
contradicciones de la estructura económica y social, obstaculizaban
también su resolución a favor de los intereses tradicionales.


De todos modos, es visible la heterogeneidad del frente golpista
en 1966 cuando el derrocamiento de Illia: la corriente de Onganía,
hombre caracterizado por la CIA como “buen amigo de los EE.UU”,
orienta la política exterior hacia el alineamiento con Washington,
adscribiendo a la llamada “Doctrina de la Seguridad Nacional y las
“fronteras ideológicas (verificándose en ese turno dictatorial el mayor
grado de acercamiento a la política exterior norteamericana hasta
entonces y que sólo se reeditaría en un nivel superior con la presidencia
de Menem). Su caída, preanunciada por el Cordobazo, y el recambio
dictatorial del Gral. Lanusse ubican en el control del poder a una
poderosa corriente militar “liberal”, representativa de un núcleo de
grandes terratenientes e intermediarios tradicionales, históricamente
asociados a Europa y que buscan diversificar el espectro de relaciones
comerciales y políticas del país sin atender a las “fronteras ideológicas”.
Articulándose con sectores de negocios vinculados a las relaciones
argentino-soviéticas, es bajo este turno dictatorial que se afirma la
“apertura al Este a través de hombres de derecha” que tanta importancia
tendrá en las relaciones internacionales argentinas bajo la dictadura de
Videla desde 1976. Es precisamente esa heterogeneidad golpista (junto
con la intención de salvar en parte los jirones de la retórica democrática
de la Alianza para el Progreso) lo que explica en 1966 la reluctancia del
embajador norteamericano en Buenos Aires a aparecer públicamente
alentando el golpe contra Illia (a diferencia de lo ocurrido con Lincoln
Gordon en 1964 en Brasil), pese al liderazgo de Onganía, a la
hegemonía de las fuerzas pronorteamericanas en la conspiración y al
15
básico respaldo de Washington al golpe en curso.


Del mismo modo la campaña golpista que culmina el 24 de
marzo de 1976 e instala la dictadura de Videla expresa la confluencia
de distintas corrientes militares que, con la dictadura y en el marco de


15 Rapoport, M. y Laufer, R., Estados Unidos ante el Brasil y la Argentina: Los golpes
militares de la década de 1960. In: Rapoport, M., Tiempo de crisis, vientos de cambio... op. cit.


193


MARIO RAPOPORT Y CLAUDIO SPIGUEL


una política económica común a los distintos núcleos del establishment
argentino, pugnarán entre sí por la inserción económica y estratégica
del país, consolidándose las nuevas “relaciones triangulares que
vincularon a la economía y el Estado argentino con las dos
superpotencias que disputaban la hegemonía mundial en los marcos
de la bipolaridad: EEUU y la Unión Soviética, relaciones con sustento
interno en distintas facciones de la propia dictadura y de las clases
dominantes, elemento fundamental para comprender el erratismo
aparente de la política exterior del “Proceso de Reorganización Nacional”
de 1976 a 1983.


En resumen, como hemos visto en todos los golpes de Estado,
con sus secuelas de regímenes militares, estuvo presente el conflicto en
torno a la inserción internacional del país, su política económica
internacional y la orientación de sus relaciones internacionales, no sólo
entre las fuerzas autonomistas respaldadas en las mayorías populares
por un lado y el poder económico y social dominante por el otro, sino
también en el seno de este último.


A la vez, en muchas ocasiones la política exterior aparece en forma
explícita y de modo visible como elemento desencadenante de la
instabilidad institucional. Así ocurrió con el derrocamiento del
desarrollista presidente Frondizi en 1962.al intentar establecer un puente
mediador frente a la hostilidad de Washington respecto de la Revolución
Cubana. "Su actitud ‘comprensiva hacia Cuba, simbolizada por la
entrevista concedida por el presidente al ‘Che Guevara en la residencia
de Olivos (aunque finalmente el gobierno rompió relaciones con La
Habana), fue una de las causas de su derrocamiento por parte de los
militares". 16 También en los preparativos del golpe de 1966, la política
exterior, de corte autonomista, del gobierno radical de Illia fue un
elemento importante. En materia económica, con la anulación de los
contratos petroleros firmados con empresas internacionales bajo el
gobierno de Frondizi generó picos de tensión en las relaciones con los
EEUU, mientras que, en el terreno diplomático, decidió no integrar la
fuerza interamericana que con la cobertura multilateral de la OEA


16 Rapoport. M., Tres momentos de la política exterior argentina, ibidem, p. 162.


194


MODELOS ECONÓMICOS, REGIMENES POLÍTICOS Y POLÍTICA EXTERIOR ARGENTINA


acompañó la intervención norteamericana en Santo Domingo en
1965.17


Desde 1955 a 1976, como hemos visto, la Argentina asiste a
una oscilación que ha sido caracterizada como “péndulo político”, en
ese péndulo se manifestaba el conflicto social emergente de una
Argentina semiindustrializada, fruto del proceso anterior, desde la crisis
del '30 hasta los primeros gobiernos peronistas. Hasta 1976 el
funcionamiento económico de la Argentina pivotea sobre la actividad
industrial mercado internista que es la base de la fuerza de los sectores
partidarios del nacionalismo económico y de una clase obrera
fuertemente concentrada y vastas capas medias. Esa actividad industrial
así como la importante área estatal de la economía genera márgenes
para la búsqueda de mayor autonomía económica y política del país.


Sin embargo, el desarrollo de la industria se ve constreñido por
las características del sector externo, lo que se manifiesta en las sucesivas
crisis de balance de pagos de la época. Se trata de una industria liviana
dependiente de importaciones y de fondos provistos por las
exportaciones agropecuarias, limitadas tanto por la nueva configuración
de los mercados mundiales, incluyendo la competencia estadounidense
y el creciente proteccionismo europeo, como por una estructura interna
del sector limitada en su desarrollo por el control de los sectores
terratenientes y monopolistas comercializadores sobre las condiciones
de producción. 18


Así los períodos de auge industrial son seguidos de crisis en los
que, a través de políticas de ajuste con devaluación, la economía rinde
tributo al sector agroexportador y al capital financiero extranjero.
Por un período las políticas predominantes buscan continuar el proceso
de industrialización por la vía dependiente atrayendo capitales
extranjeros al sector. Políticas que generan en su desarrollo un proceso


17 Rapoport, M. y Laufer, R., Estados Unidos ante el Brasil y la Argentina: los golpes militares de
la década de 1960, ibidem.


18 Cf. Portantiero, JC., Clases dominantes y crisis política en la Argentina actual. In: Braun,
O., (comp.), El capitalismo argentino en crisis, Buenos Aires, 1973; O'Donnell, G. "Estado y
alianzas en la Argentina, 1956-1976", Desarrollo Económico, n° 64, Buenos Aires, enero-
marzo de 1977 y El Estado Burocrático Autoritario, Buenos Aires, 1982.


195


MARIO RAPOPORT Y CLAUDIO SPIGUEL


de concentración y extranjerización en la industria, que afecta al
empresariado nacional, y de distribución regresiva del ingreso que limita
la expansión ulterior del mercado interno, y a la vez refuerzan los factores
deudores del balance de pagos, conduciendo a ulteriores ajustes
recesivos. 19


El péndulo político, condicionado por estas contradicciones
económicas, se expresa en la política exterior en la oscilación entre
políticas autonomistas, conjugadas con el nacionalismo económico,
por un lado y políticas “aperturistas” que pugnan por una asociación
con las grandes potencias, por el otro. Si desde 1955, la marca de la
guerra fría y la hegemonía económica, política y militar de Estados
Unidos en el continente determina las políticas de alineamiento con
Washington, no tarda en manifestarse el peso de otras relaciones
internacionales que adquieren más visibilidad en la medida en que
recrudece la competencia internacional. Esas relaciones tienen incidencia
en las clases dirigentes, en las que existen poderosos núcleos de intereses
asociados a los países europeos y, posteriormente, al compás de la crisis
de la hegemonía norteamericana, sectores terratenientes, financieros e
industriales que buscan afirmar las conexiones con la Unión Soviética
y el Este europeo, ganando esos mercados para las exportaciones
argentinas. 20 Estas conexiones se van expresando en las pugnas en el
seno de las clases dominantes, de las elites y corrientes civiles y militares
y en modalidades de política exterior que, en el marco de la adscripción
occidental, aprovechando la bipolaridad mundial buscan tomar
distancia del alineamiento con Washington, aunque no se conjugan
con los propósitos del nacionalismo económico sino de la
“diversificación de la dependencia”. Nuevamente es preciso destacar


19 Ver Rapoport, M. y colab., Historia económica política y social de la Argentina (1880-2000),
cap. 5 y 6, Buenos Aires, 2000, p. 582-603.


20 Ver Laufer, R. y Spiguel, C., Europa Occidental en las relaciones internacionales argentinas
del mundo bipolar, 1970-1990. In: Ciclos en la historia, la economía y la sociedad, n 14-15,
1er Semestre de 1998, Buenos Aires, p. 113-147; Rapoport, M., La Argentina y la Guerra
Fría: opciones económicas y estratégicas de la apertura hacia el Este (1955-1973). In:
El Laberinto... op. cit. y La posición internacional de la Argentina y las relaciones argentino-
soviéticas. In: Perina, R. y Russell, R. Argentina en el mundo, 1973-1987, Buenos Aires,
1988,  . 171-207.


196


MODELOS ECONÓMICOS, REGIMENES POLÍTICOS Y POLÍTICA EXTERIOR ARGENTINA


aquí la no complementariedad de las economías argentina y
norteamericana en el plano agropecuario, factor condicionante de esa
diversidad de relaciones y de la recurrencia de sectores hostiles a los
Estados Unidos dentro de los círculos dirigentes del país.


Esas políticas exteriores han sido caracterizadas por Puig como
de “autonomía heterodoxa”, sin ruptura radical con el mercado mundial
capitalista pero tomando distancia e incluso confrontando con las
políticas de Washington. Sin embargo, tales políticas, como se ha
señalado, no se articulan con propósitos autonómicos, propios del
nacionalismo empresario o de movimientos políticos reformistas.
Surgen por el contrario de núcleos de terratenientes y grandes
empresarios intermediarios de capitales extranjeros, y en el seno del
Estado dependiente, y han caracterizado a gobiernos y períodos en los
que se reforzó la subordinación económica y política de la nación y su
condición periférica, incluyendo la dictadura de Videla, con su curso
de destrucción de la industria nacional y endeudamiento externo,
dejando en herencia un país más dependiente que nunca de sus
exportaciones primarias y de los flujos de capital extranjero. En suma,
bajo la categoría “autonomía heterodoxa” se confunden políticas tan
diversas como las de Perón o Illia, por un lado, con las de Lanusse,
Videla o Viola, por el otro.


Siendo el único parámetro del grado de autonomía la distancia
respecto de la política de Washington, se opaca la concurrencia entre
distintas potencias en el mercado mundial contemporáneo y en el
sistema internacional de relaciones y su incidencia particular en las clases
dirigentes argentinas a lo largo del siglo XX. Se paga tributo así, como
hemos señalado anteriormente, a una visión estructuralista extrema
del escenario internacional, que absolutiza la existencia de un sólo centro
y hegemón internacional, siempre relativa y en pugna, y desvanece las
rivalidades estratégicas a nivel mundial. También, para el período que
estamos tratando esta concepción, por otra parte característica de ciertas
teorías de la dependencia de la época, identifica la bipolaridad mundial
con la competencia entre sistemas económicos (capitalista y socialista)
y niega la disputa por esferas de influencia en que crecientemente se


197


MARIO RAPOPORT Y CLAUDIO SPIGUEL


transformó la pugna entre EEUU y la URSS a escala mundial, de los
años '60 a los '80.21


V. LA DICTADURA MILITAR Y SUS CONSECUENCIAS:


DESINDUSTRIALIZACIÓN, RELACIONES TRIANGULARES Y
DEPENDENCIA "HETERODOXA"


El 24 de marzo de 1976 se implantó la dictadura militar
autodenominada  Proceso de Reorganización Nacional , la más
sangrienta de la historia argentina. Su gestión tuvo hondas consecuencias
en la economía, la sociedad, la política y la cultura del país. El terrorismo
de estado, incluyendo el método (inaugurado por el nazismo) de la
detención ilegal y desaparición de personas, fue dirigido centralmente
por la cúpula dictatorial e implementado sistemáticamente a través de
las tres armas y con el protagonismo de las distintas camarillas y corrientes
militares que habían convergido en el golpe de Estado. Apuntó, como
hemos señalado, a clausurar el período de auge de los movimientos
populares de años anteriores que irrumpió en 1969 con el Cordobazo.
Pero también el desmantelamiento de todas las potenciales resistencias
políticas, gremiales y sociales de los más diversos sectores populares era
una condición fundamental para lograr la drástica y regresiva
reconfiguración de la estructura económica y social de la Argentina
que la dictadura llevó adelante.


Este proyecto tenía determinantes sociopolíticos y económicos.
Por un lado se proponía resolver a favor de las clases dominantes de
terratenientes y capitalistas intermediarios ligados al capital extranjero
el "péndulo político de las décadas anteriores cercenando la industria
nacional y el mercado interno, sede de la fuerza del movimiento obrero
y de los sectores empresarios partidarios del nacionalismo económico.
Por el otro, el plan del ministro del dictador Videla, Martínez de Hoz,
buscó readaptar a la economía argentina en los marcos de un tipo de
división internacional del trabajo que se presentó como un retorno a


21 Cf. Puig, J. C., Doctrinas Internacionales y autonomía latinoamericana, cap. VII., Universidad
Simón Bolívar - Instituto de Altos Estudios de América Latina, Caracas, 1980.


198


MODELOS ECONÓMICOS, REGIMENES POLÍTICOS Y POLÍTICA EXTERIOR ARGENTINA


las fuentes: a la Argentina “abierta al mundo de la época agroexportadora
que había construido la generación de 1880 un siglo antes.


Se trataba de un programa tradicional reclamado por el
liberalismo oligárquico argentino desde mucho antes que coincidió
con la crisis internacional, en momentos en que los círculos financieros
de las grandes potencias promovían la atracción de los excedentes
financieros acumulados en los países centrales por parte de los países
del tercer mundo para su rápida valorización, y en un momento en
que el capital internacional no encontraba ya oportunidades rentables
para la inversión directa en la industria argentina. Por otra parte, la
dictadura militar, junto a la chilena de Pinochet, se anticipó a los
modelos neoliberales impuestos más tarde por Thatcher, Reagan y el
Consenso de Washington, constituyéndose así en una avanzada en la
implementación de esas ideas económicas en el mundo. En el caso
argentino, frente a los techos alcanzados por la industrialización
sustitutiva de importaciones y las encrucijadas a las que se enfrentaba,
la drástica solución fue la “vuelta atrás”, retrogradando la estructura
productiva a una etapa anterior con el pretexto de “modernizarla”. 22


La apertura financiera, la subvaluación del dólar, la elevación de
las tasas de interés internas con la atracción de los capitales golondrinas
se combinaron con los mecanismos rentísticos especulativos del sistema
financiero garantizados por el Estado, haciendo posible su valorización
usuraria y una formidable exportación de capitales desde la Argentina,
alimentada con el endeudamiento del Estado y las empresas públicas.
Se inició así un modelo “rentístico-financiero que perduraría bajo los
gobiernos democráticos posteriores. A ello se sumó una drástica
redistribución regresiva del ingreso hecha posible por la inflación y la
represión de la actividad sindical.


La política económica de la dictadura generó así un inédito
proceso de desindustrialización, atenazada la industria nacional
mercadointernista por la apertura importadora; el estímulo a la
especulación financiera por sobre las actividades productivas y la


22 Ver Shvarzer, Jorge, La política económica de Martínez de Hoz, Buenos Aires, 1986; Ciafardini,
H. Crisis, inflación y desindustrialización en la Argentina dependiente, Buenos Aires, 1990.


199


MARIO RAPOPORT Y CLAUDIO SPIGUEL


progresiva contracción del mercado de consumo. Simultáneamente se
afianzó un proceso de reprimarización de la economía argentina,
especializándose fundamentalmente en la producción y exportación
de cereales, algunas manufacturas de origen agropecuario de escasa
elaboración, complementados con la producción de ciertos insumos
de uso industrial difundido (papel, aluminio, tubos de acero sin costura,
etc.) y energía. Llegó a reafirmarse así la fracción terrateniente y
agroexportadora dentro de las elites dominantes al tiempo que se
concentraba el poder económico en un pequeño número de grupos
monopolistas cuya acumulación surgía de las prebendas estatales al
precio de un gigantesco endeudamiento paralelo a la regresión
productiva. 23


En lo inmediato la política dictatorial implicó la consolidación
de un nuevo esquema de relaciones internacionales, en el terreno
económico, político y diplomático, que se venía gestando desde los
inicios de la década del '70.


Por un lado, se profundizó la dependencia de la financiación y la
tecnología de los países occidentales. En pocos años se quintuplicó la
deuda externa pública, una gran parte a través de mecanismo ilegales y
no registrada por los organismos públicos correspondientes,
acompañada por el endeudamiento privado (la deuda privada de los
grandes grupos económicos beneficiados por el poder dictatorial sería
estatizada cuando sobrevino la crisis financiera y se encareció el crédito
internacional). Esa fue la etapa de génesis de la gigantesca deuda pública
argentina que desde entonces hasta la actualidad no hizo más que
multiplicarse, enorme hipoteca que incrementaría el peso de los
acreedores externos, fundamentalmente de la banca norteamericana,
en las relaciones internacionales del país. 24


Al mismo tiempo uno de los efectos esenciales de la “apertura
económica de la dictadura de Videla fue la concentración de las
exportaciones agropecuarias en el mercado soviético, en una magnitud


23 Ver Rapoport, M. y colab., Historia económica... op. cit., cap.VII, p. 788-856.
24 Ver Olmos, A. Todo lo que usted quiso saber sobre la deuda externa y siempre le ocultaron,
Buenos Aires, 1995.


200


MODELOS ECONÓMICOS, REGIMENES POLÍTICOS Y POLÍTICA EXTERIOR ARGENTINA


sólo comparable a la que ostentó en otra etapa histórica el mercado
británico. Ello garantizó a los sectores agropecuarios tradicionales
fuentes seguras de ingresos frente al progresivo cierre del Mercado
Común Europeo y confluía con los planteos de la Unión Soviética
para América Latina, que promovían un tipo de complementación
comercial característica de la vieja división internacional del trabajo de
fines del siglo XIX y gran parte del siglo XX.25 Internamente estas
relaciones tenían su sustento en un importante sector de terratenientes
y empresarios vinculados a los negocios con la URSS y otros países de
su órbita, consolidándose de ese modo la asociación de esa superpotencia
con un poderoso sector de clases dominantes argentinas. Según
proclamaron los jerarcas soviéticos, “La Argentina devino en socio más
importante de la Unión Soviética entre los países emergentes” y “el
interlocutor más importante de la URSS en América Latina”. 26


Se generó de ese modo un nuevo tipo de “relaciones triangulares”
similar al que existía con Gran Bretaña y EEUU en el período de
entreguerras. Como entonces, no se trataba de relaciones complementarias
y armónicas sino de la manifestación de la competencia económica y
estratégica internacional por el mercado (y el Estado) argentino. En
aquella época los intereses británicos (y europeos) en el país, asociados
a sectores hegemónicos dentro de las elites dominantes argentinas,
hacían valer el peso del mercado comprador y su fuerza interna para
contener el avance de la ofensiva inversora y de la hegemonía de EEUU,
gran proveedor y creciente exportador de capitales y financista.


Bajo las nuevas relaciones triangulares, las relaciones comerciales
con la URSS, más allá de un simple “pragmatismo del sector
agroexportador argentino, reflejaban y acompañaban el afianzamiento
y la ampliación de otros vínculos del Estado y el poder económico
soviético con sectores empresarios argentinos en el terreno financiero,


25 Ver Rapoport, M, Las relaciones argentino soviéticas. In: Perina, R. y Russell, R., op. cit.,
 . 199-200.


26 Alexei Manzhullo, viceministro sovético de comercio exterior, "Intercambio URSS-
Argentina", Clarín, Buenos Aires, 16.1.1983; Nota de agencia Tass, La Nación, Buenos
Aires, 7.6.1981. Ver Vacs, A. Los socios discretos, Buenos Aires, 1974; Gilbert I. El oro de
Moscú, Buenos Aires, 1995.


201


MARIO RAPOPORT Y CLAUDIO SPIGUEL


y con el Estado en obras públicas y de infraestructura (conclusión de
Salto Grande, estudios de factibilidad para una gran represa en el Paraná
Medio, centrales termoeléctricas, área nuclear, etc, con provisión de
equipos y financiación soviéticos, en el marco de compromisos
argentinos para equilibrar la balanza comercial bilateral, bajo una de
las modalidades preferidas de la operatoria del capital soviético en el
Tercer Mundo), y también en el afianzamiento de vínculos
diplomáticos y militares con un país periférico, inserto en Occidente y
parte de un continente que era esfera de influencia tradicional de los
Estados Unidos.


Este proceso se materializó en el contexto mundial de la década
del '70, caracterizado por la crisis y declinación relativa de la hegemonía
norteamericana en el mundo, la ofensiva estratégica de la URSS en los
marcos de la “detente”, y un nuevo rol, más autónomo respecto de los
EEUU, de Europa Occidental. A la vez coronó una tendencia a la
ampliación de los vínculos con la URSS presente desde antes en la elite
argentina y que comenzó a plasmarse desde la dictadura de Lanusse en
1971, y tuvo su sustento interno en sectores terratenientes, financistas
y grupos monopolistas que en asociación con ciertas corporaciones
empresarias intermediarias de capitales de Europa Occidental,
constituyeron una poderosa fracción dentro del bloque dominante en
la economía y el Estado argentino, elemento clave para explicar las
características de la toma de decisiones y las pugnas en torno a la política
exterior desde entonces hasta los inicios de la década del 1990.27


El ministro de Economía de Videla, José Alfredo Martínez de
Hoz, resumía en su figura y en su práctica la orientación de la política
económica y de las relaciones internacionales bajo la dictadura:
representante de liberalismo oligárquico y partidario de las recetas
económicas de la “escuela de Chicago”, era miembro de una de las más
poderosas familias de la oligarquía terrateniente argentina de la pampa
húmeda. Directivo de firmas de varios grupos empresarios monopolistas


27 Sobre el rol de Europa y de los intereses proeuropeos en las relaciones triangulares de la
época, Ver Laufer, R. y Spiguel, C., Europa Occidental en las relaciones internacionales
argentinas del mundo bipolar (1970-1990), Ciclos en la historia, la economía y la sociedad,
n° 14, p. 113-147.


202


MODELOS ECONÓMICOS, REGIMENES POLÍTICOS Y POLÍTICA EXTERIOR ARGENTINA


locales, hombre de confianza para el establishment financiero
internacional e importantes círculos de negocios en los Estados Unidos
(recibiendo el respaldo de David Rockefeller en su visita a Buenos
Aires en 1979), fue a la vez protagonista del afianzamiento de los
vínculos comerciales con la URSS, incluyendo su rol decisivo en la
negativa a adherir a la Argentina al embargo cerealero a la URSS
promovido por EEUU en ocasión de la invasión rusa a Afganistán.
Pese a las presiones norteamericanas, incluyendo la misión del Gral.
Goodpaster, enviado por el presidente Carter en enero de 1980, la
decisión de no plegarse al embargo implicó un salto cualitativo en la
concentración de las ventas (80% de los cereales, 20% de las carneas,
41,8% de las exportaciones totales en 1981) en el mercado soviético,
reduciendo incluso las ventas a otros mercados tradicionales pese a las
seguridades en contrario brindadas a EEUU.


Por el nuevo tipo de inserción internacional manifestado en las
relaciones "triangulares”, la Argentina resultaba vinculada principalmente
con las dos superpotencias que disputaban el mundo en esa etapa de la
bipolaridad, lo que dotaba a ese tipo de relacionamiento de importantes
componentes políticos y estratégicos. Ello se manifestará a través de la
aguda pugna entre distintas corrientes militares en el seno de la dictadura
por el control del poder, pugnas que estuvieron en la base también de
la evolución de la política exterior y de sus cambios.


Así la política exterior del último régimen militar tuvo
características “heterodoxas” respecto de las de otras dictaduras militares
latinoamericanas, aunque una heterodoxia en las antípodas de la
autonomía. Nació proclamando su vocación occidentalista y de lucha
contra la "amenaza comunista y del “marxismo internacional”, lo que
corroboró con la atroz represión fascista y el contenido profundamente
antidemocrático y antipopular de su política. La escalada represiva,
que buscó destruir no sólo a fuerzas políticas contestatarias y
revolucionarias, sino todo tipo de organización social que le ofreciera
resistencia, se proyectó fuera de las fronteras en la colaboración represiva
con las otras dictaduras del Cono Sur (Plan Cóndor).


Simultáneamente, junto a la apertura importadora y financiera
y al proceso de desindustrialización que hemos reseñado, se afianzaron


203


MARIO RAPOPORT Y CLAUDIO SPIGUEL


las relaciones con La URSS en los planos económico (convenios
comerciales, emprendimientos en obras de infraestructura), político y
diplomático, cultural y en las relaciones militares (intercambio de
misiones). Este proceso fue paralelo al desarrollo de agudos conflictos
diplomáticos y picos de tensión con los Estados Unidos. Desde 1977
el gobierno de Carter desplegó la política de promoción de los derechos
humanos, en el marco de una estrategia global para recomponer la
hegemonía norteamericana en el mundo, elemento que caracterizó la
política de Washington hacia la dictadura argentina. La condena a las
flagrantes violaciones a los derechos humanos por parte de la dictadura
de Videla se combinó en 1978 con la suspensión de toda ayuda militar
a la Argentina (créditos, donaciones, ventas, etc.). Mientras la dictadura
respondía con acusaciones de “ïntervención en los asuntos internos y
reproches sobre la incomprensión de Occidente respecto de su cruzada
“antisubversiva”, reproches que adquirieron un tono grotesco de
legitimación fascista de la represión, inversamente contaba con el
consecuente respaldo soviético, que opuso a lo largo de esos años su
veto en todos los foros internacionales a las iniciativas de condena a la
dictadura militar argentina por sus crímenes. Sin embargo, este respaldo
no se basaba en consideraciones sobre el principio de no intervención
en los asuntos internos, pues al mismo tiempo la URSS promovía o
apoyaba las resoluciones contra la sangrienta dictadura de Pinochet. 28
Como explicitaría años más tarde, luego del fin de la URSS, el
ex-premier Gorbachov: “Lo que sucedió en la Argentina de los años
70 es un ejemplo... de la guerra fría... Los EEUU apoyaban algunos
regímenes dictatoriales y esto era suficiente para que la Unión Soviética
apoyara a otros. Era una política de bloques. "29


28 El premio Nobel de la Paz argentino A. Pérez Esquivel denunció este respaldo soviético
a la dictadura argentina en el tratamiento de los desaparecidos en la Argentina, acusando a
la URSS de "imperialista y reaccionaria" y de apoyar a la dictadura fascista argentina. Ver
Revista Humor, n 36, Buenos Aires, 1982. También el canciller del último turnio dictatorial,
Aguirre Lanari destacó que  los países socialistas... han acompañado a la Argentina... en la
cuestión de los derechos humanos", La Prensa, Buenos Aires, 3.12.82.
29 Declaraciones de Gorbachov, Clarín, Buenos Aires, 6.12.1992.


204


MODELOS ECONÓMICOS, REGIMENES POLÍTICOS Y POLÍTICA EXTERIOR ARGENTINA


Con el rechazo en 1980 a adherir al embargo cerealero contra la
URSS y el salto cualitativo que implicó en las relaciones económicas
con esa potencia, hechos a los que se sumaría el involucramiento de la
dictadura argentina en el golpe de Estado de García Meza en Bolivia,
llegaron a su momento de máxima tensión las relaciones argentino-
norteamericanas. Washington no designó embajador en Buenos Aires
y las relaciones bilaterales sufrieron un marcado enfriamiento hasta la
asunción de Reagan, en enero de 1981.30


Un eje clave de la política exterior de la dictadura hasta 1980 lo
constituyó la política de confrontación y los preparativos bélicos con
relación al conflicto con la República de Chile por la posesión de tres
islas al sur de Tierra del Fuego y el Canal de Beagle (uno de los varios
puntos fronterizos en los que ambos países disputaban la soberanía
desde fines del siglo XIX). En 1971, en tiempos de la dictadura de
Lanusse, se había sometido el diferendo a la consideración de una Corte
Arbitral cuyo veredicto sería aprobado o rechazado por la Corona inglesa
que laudaría en definitiva. El laudo británico a favor de Chile y su
impugnación por la dictadura de Videla, una vez vencidos los plazos
previstos para su revisión, en 1978, dejaron montado el dispositivo
para una escalada de conflictos diplomáticos que bordeó el estallido de
una guerra en diciembre de 1978.


Durante ese año los medios de difusión saturaron a la población
con una campaña chauvinista en la que se resucitaba la óptica de un
transnochado "nacionalismo territorial del más viejo cuño oligárquico.
Incluía la presentación de la historia de la nación argentina desde el
punto de vista de los virreyes españoles de Buenos Aires, caracterizándola
por la tendencia a la amputación territorial con la “pérdida” (sic) de
Bolivia, Paraguay, Uruguay. La campaña de preparación de la opinión
pública para la guerra, (que tenía su correspondiente paralelo en los
planteos de la dictadura chilena) se entrelazó con el desarrollo en Buenos
Aires del campeonato mundial de fútbol. Éste fue utilizado por el
régimen dictatorial para intentar ganar “respetabilidad internacional”


30 Russell, R, Argentina y la política exterior del régimen autoritario (1976-1983). In:
Perina, R. y Russell, R., op. cit., p. 110.


205


MARIO RAPOPORT Y CLAUDIO SPIGUEL


en el mismo momento en que se producía una nueva vuelta de tuerca
de la sangrienta represión. Pero además de intentar echar una pesada
cortina sobre sus crímenes – rasgada crecientemente por las Madres de
Plaza de Mayo y otros organismos de Derechos Humanos y la
solidaridad internacional – también la dictadura buscó instrumentar
los sentimientos deportivos de la población para pavimentar el camino
de los preparativos bélicos, intentando lograr una base de masas para
su política interna y externa, en uno de los momento más agudos de
fascistización ideológica y práctica del régimen.


Sin embargo, en la preparación de la guerra contra Chile no se
trataba sólo de lograr la cohesión interna ni tampoco exclusivamente
de fundamentar las gigantescas compras de armas que la escalada hizo
posible (en las que se destacaron las ventas de ciertas potencias europeas).
La confrontación entre los dos países latinoamericanos y los
preparativos bélicos trascendían estos objetivos y poseían importantes
determinantes estratégicos. El conflicto por el Canal de Beagle ponía
en primer plano el control del paso interoceánico austral del hemisferio
americano – único paso naval en caso de inutilización del Canal de
Panamá – en el extremo del Atlántico Sur, un área clave para el transporte
mundial, frente a las islas Malvinas controladas por Gran Bretaña, con
proyecciones hacia la Antártida, y donde era ya importante la presencia
de flotas pesqueras soviética y de otros países del Este. 31 Esto sucedía
en un período mundial de aguda confrontación estratégica entre las
dos superpotencias, con el despliegue de bases y flotas en todos los
continentes y mares y el estallido de conflictos locales disparados o
condicionados por la disputa bipolar en zonas vinculadas a muchos
pasos interoceánicos. 32


Finalmente la confrontación bélica fratricida que se preparaba
entre las dictaduras de Videla y Pinochet fue frenada. Por un lado, a


31 La dictadura concretó con la URSS un importante convenio pesquero y de industrialización
del krill en el Atlántico Sur, inaugurando una línea de las relaciones bilaterales que continuaría,
luego de la Guerra de Malvinas, bajo el gobierno de Alfonsín, hasta la firma del convenio
ictícola de 1986, lo que generó como represalia por parte de Gran Bretaña la declaración de
la zona de pesca exclusiva en torno a las islas Malvinas.


32 Ver Rapoport M., Las relaciones argentino-soviéticas, op. cit., p. 182.


206


MODELOS ECONÓMICOS, REGIMENES POLÍTICOS Y POLÍTICA EXTERIOR ARGENTINA


contracorriente de la fascistización y el chauvinismo promovido por la
dictadura, se fue manifestando una creciente oposición popular, en la
que jugaron un gran papel amplios sectores de la iglesia católica,
pronunciamientos a favor de la paz con Chile de intelectuales
connotados como Ernesto Sábato y otros, y diversas corrientes
populares y personalidades políticas de oposición. Ello se expresó en
las procesiones religiosas de esos años que se convirtieron en grandes
demostraciones por la paz de contenido antidictatorial. Por otra parte,
jugaron en contra del desencadenamiento de la guerra la intervención
del Papa Juan Pablo II, ciertos intereses europeos, la posición de Brasil
y el gobierno de Carter, temeroso de un foco de conflicto en el Cono
Sur de imprevisibles consecuencias estratégicas. Esas condiciones y la
llegada de un enviado del Vaticano, el Cardenal Samoré, a principios
de 1979, con la recepción popular a su figura convertida en la primera
manifestación popular masiva bajo la dictadura, que marchó con
banderas argentinas y chilenas y consignas por la paz desde la Catedral
en la Plaza de Mayo hasta la nunciatura apostólica, obligaron a la
dictadura a aceptar la mediación papal en el conflicto.


Se ha buscado explicar la “heterodoxia de la política exterior de
la dictadura de Videla – incluyendo los conflictos diplomáticos con
EEUU y el conflicto del Beagle como un resultado de las
contradicciones entre dos tipos de diplomacia, una económica y otra
militar. La primera de carácter liberal, “pragmático , ligada a
consideraciones de índole comercial y financiera, respetuosa del statu
quo internacional y sin limitaciones ideológicas; presidida la diplomacia
militar por una ideología “nacionalista” y “occidentalista”, atada a las
doctrinas de "la seguridad nacional” y a consideraciones geopolíticas,
partidaria de la política de poder en las relaciones con los países vecinos.
Las contradicciones entre diplomacia económica y militar explicarían
“las inconsistencias y ambigüedades de la política exterior del ‘Proceso’
en el área". 33


33 Ver. Russell R., Argentina y la política exterior... In: Russell R. y Perina, R., Argentina en
el mundo... op. cit.


207


MARIO RAPOPORT Y CLAUDIO SPIGUEL


Tales contradicciones devendrían de una disfuncionalidad entre
elites dirigentes: a saber, de las tensiones dentro de la alianza FFAA/
poder económico hegemónico, tensiones que surgirían del hecho de
que “las FFAA adquirieron márgenes relativos de autonomía frente a
los grupos económicos dominantes en beneficio de los cuales se
producía en definitiva la transformación económica y social operada
por la dictadura. 34 Tales márgenes estarían vinculados, según esta tesis,
al incremento de los privilegios corporativos de las FFAA y devenían
en la imposición de sus concepciones y visión del mundo.


Esta tesis ha sido planteada como clave explicativa para dar cuenta
también de los enfrentamientos producidos en el interior del régimen
y de lo que se presenta como el “rumbo errático de su política exterior,
desde Videla y el conflicto del Beagle a Galtieri, el acercamiento a
EEUU y, súbitamente, la recuperación por la Argentina de las islas
Malvinas y la guerra con Inglaterra.


Es evidente que un régimen controlado por las FFAA en todos
los niveles de las instituciones estatales y paraestatales, nacionales y
provinciales, con el reparto entre las tres armas de las jurisdicciones y
funciones, convertía al componente corporativo al igual que a los
privilegios y doctrinas militares en elementos condicionantes para
explicar ciertas particularidades de la política interna e internacional de
la dictadura. Sin embargo, esta tesis resulta superficial, abstracta e
impotente para explicar las determinaciones esenciales de la política
exterior del régimen y sus variaciones en el tiempo. En primer lugar la
ideología del nacionalismo territorial y las políticas de poder dentro de
América Latina, características por cierto de muchas dictaduras militares,
lejos de la incoherencia, estuvieron presentes desde la formación del
Estado oligárquico argentino en épocas del “civil” régimen conservador
interactuando en determinados períodos con las políticas más
crudamente liberales, “cosmopolitas” y de subordinación económica y
diplomática a las grandes potencias. Además, no sólo en la Argentina
sino en todo el continente los conflictos limítrofes y enfrentamientos
entre países latinoamericanos, acompañados de la ideología del


34 Russell R., ibidem. p. 101.


208


MODELOS ECONÓMICOS, REGIMENES POLÍTICOS Y POLÍTICA EXTERIOR ARGENTINA


nacionalismo oligárquico o favorecidos por las doctrinas funcionales
al “corporativismo militar”, han sido históricamente condicionados,
instrumentados, potenciados o aplacados por intereses externos,
económicos y estratégicos, coyunturales y de largo plazo, vehiculizados
en la operatoria de las grandes potencias en el área. Determinantes que
se materializaban en las propias relaciones asimétricas de dependencia
y subordinación de los estados dependientes y que las clases dominantes
locales promovían a través de las políticas liberales, “pragmáticas”, de
su “diplomacia económica (y este ha sido el caso tanto en la
paradigmática Guerra del Chaco entre Paraguay y Bolivia como en la
reciente guerra entre Perú y Ecuador en plena época “globalizada”). 35


Ciertamente, la existencia de regímenes democráticos,
respaldados por la voluntad popular, ha favorecido en general las
soluciones pactadas de las controversias y diferendos territoriales entre
los países del área, pero es de señalar que esta tendencia se ha verificado
del modo más consecuente, con un ideario latinoamericanista
conjugado con políticas de alianza, convergencia e incluso integración
económica, bajo gobiernos que expresaron a fuerzas proclives al
nacionalismo económico y que intentaron políticas de desarrollo y
ampliación de la autonomía económica y política respecto de las grandes
potencias. 36


Por otro lado, la tesis aquí criticada hace abstracción de la
convergencia esencial de “diplomacia económica” y “militar” en los
hechos decisivos y en los rasgos “heterodoxos” – en términos de Puig
de la política exterior dictatorial hasta 1981: la ampliación y
profundización de las relaciones con la URSS por parte de los turnos
dictatoriales de Videla y Viola, tanto en el plano económico como en
el militar constituyeron un factor decisivo para explicar la conflictividad
con los EE UU.


35 Ver Rapoport M. y Madrid E., Los países del Cono Sur y las grandes potencias. In:
Rapoport M. y Cervo A. L., (Comp.), El Cono Sur, una historia común, Buenos Aires, 2002.
36 Ver Quijada, M., El proyecto peronista de creación de un Zollverein sudamericano,
1946-1955. In: Ciclos en la historia, la economía y la sociedad n 6, Buenos Aires, 1994; Moniz
Bandeira, L. A., Las relaciones en el Cono Sur: iniciativas de integración. In: Rapoport, M.
y Cervo, A. L. (comp.) El Cono Sur, una historia común, op. cit.


209


MARIO RAPOPORT Y CLAUDIO SPIGUEL


Así, el "pragmatismo desideologizado de Martínez de Hoz
reflejó en realidad los intereses de importantes sectores del poder
económico local asociado a esas relaciones y a ciertos intereses europeos,
que buscaban afianzar la “diversificación de la dependencia en el marco
de una disputa cada vez más aguda con los sectores pronorteamericanos
del establishment local. Una pugna que fue determinante en las
contradicciones en el seno del régimen dictatorial y en las variaciones
de su política exterior, en tanto el “poder económico y las clases
dominantes no constituían, como no lo han sido a lo largo del siglo
XX, un bloque homogéneo, pese a la coincidencia de intereses básica
que motorizó los rasgos generales de la política económica de la
dictadura.


Por su parte, el “occidentalismo” proclamado por las FFAA no
fue óbice para el anudamiento de importantes lazos en el terreno militar
con la Unión Soviética. Esa convergencia otorga coherencia a los aspectos
principales de la política exterior de la dictadura hasta el desplazamiento
de Viola por Galtieri a fines de 1981. En realidad las pugnas y
enfrentamientos entre distintas corrientes militares, potenciadas
ciertamente por la feudalización del poder y las características del
régimen dictatorial, no pueden reducirse como se ha planteado a
conflictos interpersonales o corporativos. Por el contrario, estaban
determinadas en última instancia por la articulación de las distintas
corrientes militares con distintos sectores de terratenientes, capitales
intermediarios y corporaciones financieras asociados a distintos centros
del poder mundial y en aguda disputa por el control del Estado y el
poder dictatorial (no exclusivamente militar).


Tampoco la conservación del área capitalista de Estado (empresas
públicas, fabricaciones militares, etc.) puede explicarse simplemente
por un “nacionalismo militar en contradicción, como se ha aducido,
con las posturas liberales de la política económica de la dictadura. Es
cierto que el origen y la ampliación de las empresas estatales estuvieron
asociados a su promoción y defensa por parte de las corrientes políticas
e intereses empresarios proclives al nacionalismo económico, que se
expresaban también en corrientes reales, aunque generalmente débiles,
dentro de las FFAA. Sin embargo, no se debe olvidar la función que


210


MODELOS ECONÓMICOS, REGIMENES POLÍTICOS Y POLÍTICA EXTERIOR ARGENTINA


las empresas estatales tuvieron dentro de la política económica de la
dictadura, en el marco de un Estado que, más que nunca, operaba
como el instrumento nítido de sectores terratenientes, intermediarios
de capitales extranjeros e intereses transnacionales.


Así, lejos de servir como palanca para el desarrollo autónomo y
la acumulación de capital en manos de una burguesía nacional, por
otra parte agudamente afectada y debilitada por los cambios económicos
que la dictadura promovía, el área estatal de la economía (además de
su instrumentación para potenciar el endeudamiento público en función
de alimentar la especulación financiera y la extracción de capitales de la
Argentina) tuvo como función predominante ser palanca para la
acumulación, a través de diversos mecanismos, legales o ilegales, de los
grupos económicos de capital concentrado orgánicamente vinculados
al aparato estatal, la mayor parte de ellos intermediario de capitales
extranjeros, testaferros de los mismos o directamente empresas
transnacionales. (Esta función de la importante área estatal de la
economía la convirtió así, desde el fin del primer peronismo, en un
factor determinante en las pugnas por el poder estatal entre distintas
fracciones de las clases dominantes, asociadas a distintos intereses
transnacionales, y su control fue un elemento clave en la orientación
de las relaciones económicas internacionales del país con las grandes
potencias). Esto condujo a su saqueo, creciente déficit y descapitalización,
lo que a la larga legitimaría su privatización y extranjerización lisa y
llana con la aplicación de las políticas neoliberales bajo la presidencia
de Menem en los años '90, y se produjo, por cierto, en otras condiciones
internacionales. Así se conjugó el liberalismo de Martínez de Hoz con
la operatoria del régimen militar que tampoco en este aspecto tuvo
nada de "nacionalista".


VI. EL DEBILITAMIENTO DE LA DICTADURA Y LA GUERRA DE MALVINAS


La frustración de los planes para una guerra contra Chile fue el
prólogo de una agudización de las contradicciones sociales y políticas
que debilitaron al régimen y, en particular, al sector hasta entonces
hegemónico en la cúpula dictatorial con Videla, que planificaba con


211


MARIO RAPOPORT Y CLAUDIO SPIGUEL


su sucesor Viola una salida política continuista buscando el aval de
corrientes políticas civiles proclives a la colaboración.


En 1981 se desata una crisis financiera incontenible, corolario
inevitable del plan Martínez de Hoz, que inauguró una larga década
recesiva en la economía argentina y fue el capítulo local anticipado de
la crisis de la deuda externa latinoamericana desatada en México con
posterioridad. Pero también operó un elemento escasamente sopesado
en las reconstrucciones historiográficas y en los análisis políticos: la
resistencia popular. Una zigzagueante reactivación del movimiento
sindical opositor y de los conflictos obreros, a partir del primer paro
general en abril de 1979, pese a la represión y al colaboracionismo
directo de una parte de las jerarquías sindicales; el desarrollo a un nuevo
nivel de la lucha democrática encabezada por las Madres de Plaza de
Mayo y otros organismos defensores de los derechos humanos; la oleada
de protestas de pequeños y medianos productores agropecuarios en los
inicios de la década del 80, son todos afluentes que impulsan y expresan
un salto en el movimiento antidictatorial, y conforman el trasfondo,
junto con la crisis financiera, del naufragio de la salida continuista
“cívico-militar”, planificada por Viola y sus equipos.


En esas condiciones se agudiza la pugna entre las distintas
corrientes en el seno del régimen. Ella deriva en el desplazamiento de
Viola y la corriente hasta entonces hegemónica, que sin embargo
conserva el control de resortes claves del gobierno y el aparato estatal.
El recambio, esta vez no planificado sino resultado de esa disputa que
operaba debilitando la cohesión del régimen, eleva a la cúpula del
mismo a Galtieri, ex-jefe del II cuerpo de Ejército, destacado por sus
actividades represivas y sus ideas reaccionarias, como expresión de una
coalición de corrientes militares opuestas al violismo, que a la postre se
revelaría muy heterogénea. Prolongando una línea internacional que
ya había desplegado Galtieri como comandante en jefe del ejército
bajo la presidencia de Viola, durante una gira que realizó a los EEUU,
la nueva cúpula dictatorial propicia un acercamiento a Washington
sobre la base de una intervención, acordada con los EEUU, de oficiales,
asesores y armas para la organización, en colaboración con la CIA, de
las fuerzas contrarrevolucionarias en Nicaragua y América Central. Tal


212


MODELOS ECONÓMICOS, REGIMENES POLÍTICOS Y POLÍTICA EXTERIOR ARGENTINA


realineamiento se producía sobre la base del ascenso de Reagan a la
presidencia, el consiguiente abandono de la política de los “derechos
humanos" de la administración Carter, y la adscripción a criterios
geopolíticos y estratégicos en las relaciones con los gobiernos
latinoamericanos, en función de la nueva política global de ofensiva en
la disputa bipolar y de recomposición de la hegemonía norteamericana
en el mundo. En esas condiciones el acercamiento de la dictadura
argentina a Washington expresaba un giro en favor de la política
norteamericana, mientras que por primera vez desde 1976 la Unión
Soviética a través de su agencia noticiosa criticaba abiertamente a la
Junta militar argentina.


Sin embargo, como un signo de la agudización de las
contradicciones internas en la sociedad argentina, en el propio régimen
dictatorial y en la posición internacional del país, el 2 de abril de 1982,
pocos días después que manifestaciones de protesta obrera y popular
antidictatorial habían sido reprimidas en los aledaños de la Plaza de
Mayo, se producía la recuperación por las FFAA argentinas de las Islas
Malvinas (capturadas por los ingleses en 1833, en un acto de piratería
típico de la época, y que constituyen desde entonces un enclave colonial
británico en territorio nacional). Este hecho y la posterior declaración
de guerra británica con el envío de una flota al Atlántico Sur, cambió
todo el escenario político interno e internacional, colocando en primer
plano la especificidad del “conflicto Norte-Sur” en las relaciones
internacionales y la política exterior argentina.


Muchos aspectos del desencadenamiento de estos hechos
permanecen aún oscuros en la historiografía. Sin duda la nueva cúpula
dictatorial buscó ganar consenso popular para el régimen y para su
propia hegemonía dentro de él apelando a una causa de reivindicación
nacional frente al imperialismo británico cara a las mayorías populares.
Pero con ser éste un determinante de peso, sobre todo para comprender
el proceso político interno durante el conflicto, no agota la explicación
de su génesis ni mucho menos la del desarrollo de la guerra. Tampoco,
como en el caso del conflicto del Beagle, la explicación puede detenerse
en la ideología del “nacionalismo territorial presente en las doctrinas
militares, más aún teniendo en cuenta las diversas e incluso antagónicas


213


MARIO RAPOPORT Y CLAUDIO SPIGUEL


hipótesis de conflicto, blancos, alineamientos y disposiciones de fuerzas
que implicaban por un lado la recuperación de las Malvinas y por el
otro la disputa con Chile por el Canal de Beagle. Parece probable que
la corriente que dirigía la dictadura e impulsó la recuperación de las
islas, intentó la iniciativa “para detener la crisis en la que el país se
hallaba sumido, resolver las contradicciones que surgía de su posición
internacional y amalgamar los consejos cruzados de Washington y
Moscú , confiando en un conflicto corto que obtuviera la mediación
y hasta el aval de los EE UU y/o el respaldo soviético, obligando a
Londres a una salida negociada y reposicionando al Estado argentino
en la disputada y estratégica área del Atlántico Sur.37 Lo cierto es que
más allá de estos determinantes iniciales, y de los errores de percepción
de la corriente militar que impulsó la recuperación – sobre todo respecto
de la posición del Estado norteamericano con relación a Gran Bretaña
y en particular el cambio que implicaba la política de la administración
Reagan con relación al conjunto del sistema internacional y la respuesta
soviética frente a ese cambio –, el envío de la flota inglesa al Atlántico
Sur y el desencadenamiento de una guerra entre una gran potencia y
un país dependiente y periférico tensó al rojo vivo la contradicción
Norte-Sur inherente al sistema internacional.


Por una parte, más allá de las intenciones de la búsqueda de
consenso por parte de la dictadura, la respuesta popular frente a la
recuperación de las islas para la soberanía argentina y, más aún, frente a
la agresión inglesa, implicó una intensa conmoción en la opinión pública
local. La emergencia de profundos sentimientos de reivindicación de
los intereses nacionales, contradictorios en su esencia con la naturaleza
del régimen dictatorial, desbordó los torpes intentos de manipulación
de la dictadura y generó, a partir de las iniciativas de solidaridad popular
hacia los soldados y tropas que marchaban al combate, una activación


37 Rapoport, M., La posición internacional de la Argentina y las relaciones argentino
soviéticas, op. cit., p. 185. Ver también Rapoport, M., La guerra de las Malvinas y la política
exterior argentina: la visión de los protagonistas. In: El laberinto argentino, op. cit., cap. V.;
Büsser, Carlos, Malvinas, la guerra inconclusa, Buenos Aires, 1987; Costa Méndez, N.
Testimonios sobre la Guerra de Malvinas, Revista Militarn° 742, Buenos Aires, enero-marzo
de 1998.


214


MODELOS ECONÓMICOS, REGIMENES POLÍTICOS Y POLÍTICA EXTERIOR ARGENTINA


generalizada de las actividades sociales, gremiales y políticas. Amplísimos
sectores populares ocuparon calles, plazas y espacios públicos y
conquistaron en los hechos libertades que a su vez configuraron un
nuevo escenario político interno que condicionaría los siguientes pasos
del régimen dictatorial y que éste luego de la derrota ya no podría
retrotraer al punto de partida.


Por otra parte, el desarrollo del conflicto bélico generó una
profunda crisis en el seno del gobierno de las FFAA. En primer lugar la
guerra, lejos de atenuar, agudizó las pugnas entre las diversas corrientes
militares y civiles por la hegemonía dentro del régimen. Así, importantes
jerarquías militares y del establishment de las clases dirigentes actuaron
durante el conflicto apostando al desgaste de la cúpula que lideraba la
acción bélica y preparándose para un recambio interno. En segundo
lugar se abrió una profunda crisis político-ideológica en las filas
militares. Las FFAA argentinas, entrenadas y preparadas desde siempre
para la represión interna o con relación a hipótesis de conflicto con
países limítrofes, en la primera guerra en que estuvieron involucradas
durante el siglo XX debían enfrentarse con una de las principales
potencias de Occidente. En las filas de los que buscaron llevar adelante
el esfuerzo bélico, quienes confiaban en el apoyo o la mediación
norteamericana, vieron jugarse todo el respaldo de Washington a favor
de su aliado inglés que contó también con el respaldo de las otras
potencias de la Comunidad Europea, con la solitaria excepción de
España. También la confianza en el apoyo soviético frente a Inglaterra,
sobre la base de las estrechas relaciones consolidadas bajo la dictadura,
se vio decepcionada: la URSS, pese al apoyo verbal, no vetó en la
ONU la resolución condenatoria de la ocupación argentina de las islas
e incluso suspendió sus compras de granos durante el transcurso del
conflicto, preparándose para operar en las relaciones bilaterales a
posteriori del mismo y de un nuevo recambio en la cúpula dictatorial.
Por el contrario, eran los países latinoamericanos – de Brasil y Perú a
Cuba - así como el amplio campo de naciones del Tercer Mundo
articulados en el Movimiento de los No Alineados, quienes resultaban
respaldando la posición argentina y desde donde emergieron las
manifestaciones más amplias de solidaridad popular. Estas


215


MARIO RAPOPORT Y CLAUDIO SPIGUEL


contradicciones generarían luego de la derrota profundas fisuras en las
filas militares, “verticales” y “horizontales”, que debilitaron la cohesión
de ese pilar del aparato estatal y, entrelazadas con el proceso político
bajo el régimen constitucional, emergerían con la heterogénea corriente
nacionalista "carapintada”, en las sucesivas crisis militares hasta los inicios
de la década del 1990.


Esta profunda crisis en las fuerzas armadas se conjugó con la
absoluta incapacidad del Estado dictatorial para llevar adelante con
eficacia el esfuerzo bélico. Entre posturas “triunfalistas difundidas a
través de los medios de difusión y actividades derrotistas de otras
corrientes militares y civiles que apostaban a un recambio en la cúpula
dictatorial, la Junta Militar no tomó ninguna medida que apuntara a
crear mejores condiciones para el aislamiento y desgaste de la posición
inglesa (sanciones económicas, etc.). En última instancia, a medida
que se desarrollaba el conflicto se volvía más aguda la contradicción
entre el régimen dictatorial y la política interna y exterior que el
enfrentamiento con Gran Bretaña imponía, lo que condicionó
fuertemente la derrota y rendición argentina en junio de 1982.


Esta condujo a la caída de Galtieri y al nuevo turno dictatorial
del Gral. Bignone, con el que la corriente videlista recapturó la
conducción del régimen. Sobre la base de un proceso de repudio popular
incontenible del poder dictatorial, éste prepara una salida electoral
negociada con los principales partidos opositores, el peronismo y el
radicalismo, que se concretó más de un año después, en diciembre de
1983. Por un lado, el retorno al régimen constitucional fue impuesto
por la crisis de la dictadura y el ascenso del movimiento antidictatorial
que estuvo en el trasfondo de todos aquellos sucesos. Por el otro, la
salida electoral presidida por la propia dictadura militar y negociada
con la oposición civil, mantuvo intacto el aparato estatal en manos de
un poder económico sumamente concentrado en un puñado de grandes
corporaciones intermediarias de capitales extranjeros y terratenientes,
un poder emergente de la desindustrialización, el empequeñecimiento
del mercado interno y la profundización de la dependencia. Este poder
económico y el aparato estatal moldeado a su servicio constituyeron,


216


MODELOS ECONÓMICOS, REGIMENES POLÍTICOS Y POLÍTICA EXTERIOR ARGENTINA


junto a la pesada deuda externa y la impunidad para los represores y
beneficiarios de la dictadura, la herencia y el condicionamiento que
ésta legó a la Argentina de las dos últimas décadas del siglo XX.


VII. GLOBALIZACIÓN, POLÍTICAS EXTERIORES Y DEMOCRACIA: DE LA
CRISIS ECONÓMICA A LA CRISIS POLÍTICA


Las hondas transformaciones operadas por la última dictadura
militar y profundizadas durante los años ‘90 en la estructura económica
y social y del poder en la Argentina, con el reforzamiento sin precedentes
de su inserción dependiente y periférica en el mercado mundial y el
sistema internacional, han determinado la evolución del régimen
constitucional, del sistema político y de la política exterior hasta la
profunda crisis económica, social y política actual.


Estas transformaciones se reflejaron en las corrientes dominantes
del pensamiento económico y en materia de política exterior que, a
partir de la retirada de la dictadura, proyectaron su visión sobre las
causas del autoritarismo militar, la inestabilidad institucional y la ruina
del país. Reflejando el balance de la guerra de Malvinas desde la
perspectiva de las potencias centrales, el historiador conservador inglés
Paul Johnson afirmaría posteriormente, en los '90, que era la victoria
inglesa la que había ayudado a los argentinos a obtener un sistema
democrático. Reduciendo el contenido de la guerra al carácter de los
regímenes políticos de los contendientes, escamoteaba así la incidencia
esencal de los intereses transnacionales y de la operatoria de las grandes
potencias en los golpes de Estado, en particular el de 1976 y en el
sustento al proyecto político económico de la dictadura militar, opacaba
el papel de la oposición popular antidictatorial en la crisis y retirada de
la misma e identificaba al régimen dictatorial argentino con el
nacionalismo y la defensa de la soberanía argentina sobre las Malvinas.
Por otra parte Johnson ubicaba en aquella guerra el origen de un periplo
que había culminado con la Guerra del Golfo y el “nuevo orden
mundial". "... Creo que tuvo efectos positivos sobre los EEUU, porque
le permitió superar los complejos de Vietnam, Watergate y las derrotas
ante la URSS en África. Malvinas fue parte de algo que se hizo en


217


MARIO RAPOPORT Y CLAUDIO SPIGUEL


Granada, Panamá, y en el ataque a Libia. Eso permitió que se llegase al
Golfo como se llegó. Y eso comenzó en las Falkland”.38 Se legitimaba
así, tras la oposición entre dictadura y democracia, la ofensiva de los
países centrales que generaría la nueva relación de fuerzas con relación
a los países periféricos característica de los años 1990.


Las producciones intelectuales locales, inspiradas en esas
perspectivas sobre la base del pensamiento neoliberal que comenzaba a
abrirse paso en los años '80, generaron una interpretación de las causas
del autoritarismo militar y la crisis y “declinación” económica argentina.
Éstas serían el resultado de un presunto “aislacionismo” argentino,
cuando no de un “desafío nacionalista”. 39 Se soslayaba así el hecho de
que las tendencias predominantes en la inserción internacional de la
Argentina que se pretendían explicar con esos presupuestos devenían
no de un presunto aislamiento de la economía y el Estado argentino,
sino por el contrario de su estrecha y peculiar imbricación, de carácter
dependiente, con las tendencias en pugna entre las grandes potencias
en el escenario internacional. Tales interpretaciones resultaban además
de una concepción que adjudicaba la génesis y desarrollo de la
“declinación” argentina a la industrialización mercado internista
cimentada desde la posguerra, contrastándola con la Argentina “abierta”
de principios de siglo, la del modelo agroexportador y la “conexión
especial con una gran potencia. Esta concepción, compatible con las
perspectivas e intereses promovidos por los “estudios internacionales”
de origen anglosajón, había sido por otra parte una matriz del
pensamiento conservador liberal argentino desde siempre y comenzaba
a adquirir predominio en círculos del establishment económico, político
y académico de nuestro país en la década del 1980. Más allá de su
escasa cientificidad desde el punto de vista historiográfico, su
revitalización emergía en realidad de la legitimación del propio proceso
de desindustrialización impuesto a partir de 1976 y estaría en la base


38 Johnson, P. Historia de la guerra de Malvinas, Buenos Aires, 1992, p. 10.
39 Ya hemos señalado en qué medida esta interpretación está presente en la literatura
estadounidense para explicar de modo abstracto toda expresión de conflicto o distancia de
la Argentina respecto de la política exterior norteamericana.


218


MODELOS ECONÓMICOS, REGIMENES POLÍTICOS Y POLÍTICA EXTERIOR ARGENTINA


de las formulaciones históricas justificatorias del “realismo periférico”
que acompañó la nueva política exterior de los años '90.40


Así, desde 1983, la consolidación del régimen constitucional
argentino y el logro de una “democracia estable”, se fue asociando a la
búsqueda de una reinserción económica y diplomática de la Argentina
en el sistema internacional que dejara atrás definitivamente las políticas
mercado internistas y nacionalistas, “tercermundistas", políticas cuyas
bases internas de sustentación, económicas, sociales y políticas, se habían
por otra parte debilitado agudamente merced al proceso dictatorial.
Un nuevo “consenso” en la visión de los sectores dirigentes, consenso
que no anulaba su heterogeneidad, emergía de las nuevas relaciones de
fuerza internas e internacionales. Por un tiempo, bajo la presidencia de
Alfonsín, la diplomacia argentina esgrime precisamente el objetivo de
consolidación del régimen democrático argentino como elemento
fundante y legitimador de una política económica y exterior que, en
busca de afrontar la crisis, prolonga tendencias presentes en los sectores
dirigentes locales desde la década anterior.


En política económica, mediada por el sinuoso recorrido surcado
por la crisis y recesión y los sucesivos planes de ajuste, se esboza la
afirmación de una estrategia exportadora, en principio basada en
potenciar las exportaciones agropecuarias y más tarde con base en la
alianza del Estado con los grupos económicos dominantes, en función


40 Fue significativa en ese sentido la producción intelectual de Carlos Escudé, desde la
aparición de su libro Gran Bretaña, EE UU y la declinación argentina, 1942-1949, Buenos Aires,
1983 y en otras obras suyas, así como las tesis económicas planteadas en el libro de Carlos
Díaz Alejandro, Ensayo sobre la historia económica argentina, Buenos Aires, 1975. Tesis sobre
las que se fue abriendo paso una interpretación “revisionista de crítica a la política exterior
argentina, aunque en verdad representaba un retorno a la visión liberal,  tradicional" y
"fundadora de la misma con el modelo agroexportador y el régimen oligárquico de principios
del siglo XX. Con el libro Gran Bretaña, EE UU y las clases dirigentes argentinas (1940-1945),
Buenos Aires, 1981, M. Rapoport proponía una interpretación distinta de la de Escudé sobre
la evolución de las relaciones internacionales argentinas, lo que generó una polémica, que se
publicó en la revista Desarrollo Económico, $n^{\circ}92$ enero-marzo 1984. Ver para las confrontaciones
en el campo intelectual en materia de relaciones internacionales y de política exterior
presentes desde mediados de la década del 1980 y durante los años 1990 en América Latina
y en la Argentina, Cervo, Amado L.,"Sob o signo neoliberal: as relacões internacionais da
América Latina", Revista Brasileira de Política Internacional, año 43, $n^{\circ}2$, Brasilia, 2000.


219


MARIO RAPOPORT Y CLAUDIO SPIGUEL


de encarar el manejo de la deuda externa y garantizar financiación
internacional.


En política exterior, todavía en los marcos de la bipolaridad
mundial, la búsqueda de apoyos al nuevo régimen democrático entre
los gobiernos europeos, particularmente los de orientación social
democrática, y la profundización de las relaciones argentino-soviéticas
en los planos económico y diplomático opera, junto a la política
latinoamericana del gobierno constitucional, como pivot para procurar
de lo que se catalogó como “una relación madura con los EE UU,
cuya administración aparece favoreciendo el retorno de los países del
hemisferio a sistemas democráticos de gobierno. Esta estrategia
“heterodoxa” (en términos de una línea ya tradicional en las clases
dirigentes argentinas), que al principio se manifiesta en intentos de
una negociación política de la deuda externa con la banca occidental,
particularmente estadounidense, pronto manifiesta sus propios límites:
El apoyo de las potencias europeas al gobierno argentino no fue óbice
para sus presiones por un tratamiento del endeudamiento externo a
través de las negociaciones con los organismos financieros
internacionales; las relaciones con la Unión Soviética estuvieron
fuertemente condicionadas desde 1986 por el derrumbe de las compras
de ese origen – que serían reemplazadas por las brasileñas, con la génesis
y el desarrollo de la integración regional en el Mercosur –, en el contexto
de la crisis rusa, y la nueva política de “distensión” con los EEUU
inaugurada por Gorbachov limitó el alcance de aquella estrategia
diplomática inicial. Todos estos factores condujeron al gobierno de
Alfonsín a formulaciones más “ortodoxas” en su política económica
internacional en el contexto de una crisis imparable, escenario de una
aguda disputa entre las distintas fracciones en el seno del poder
económico y las clases dominantes argentinas que culminó en la
hiperinflación de 1989.


Una iniciativa diplomática de aquel gobierno estaría destinada a
perdurar inaugurando una nueva y relevante dimensión en la inserción
internacional y en la política exterior argentina. Prolongando una
tendencia al acercamiento bilateral iniciado ya bajo las dos dictaduras
militares en 1979 con los acuerdos sobre la cuenca del Plata, la entrevista


220


MODELOS ECONÓMICOS, REGIMENES POLÍTICOS Y POLÍTICA EXTERIOR ARGENTINA


Alfonsín-Sarney de 1985 y el Acta de integración regional entre Argentina
y Brasil dieron los primeros pasos en la génesis del Mercosur. La
iniciativa, como hemos señalado ya, permitiría una reorientación muy
significativa de las exportaciones argentinas, generando un mercado de
reemplazo frente a la drástica reducción de las compras soviéticas, y
potenció geométricamente y en muy pocos años el comercio
intrarregional. Dirigidos a generar condiciones para paliar la recesión
económica de la región, los pasos hacia la integración regional se vieron
facilitados por los cambios en el escenario internacional, con la crisis
rusa, la distensión entre las dos superpotencias y la nueva política de
Washington frente a la retirada de las dictaduras militares y los procesos
de democratización en el área. Si en un principio pudo concebirse
sobre todo desde el Brasil –, según patrones dearrollistas, como un
instrumento para potenciar una política de sustitución de importaciones
en escala ampliada, especialización sectorial y apertura limitada, la
búsqueda de complementación sectorial, en las que se afirmó el interés
de grupos oligopólicos argentinos e inversiones transnacionales, sobre
todo europeas, se combinaría pronto con las políticas de apertura
generalizada a las inversiones extranjeras y al mercado mundial que
caracterizaría las concepciones del gobierno de Menem en la década
de 1990.


Este proceso económico y político interno de fines de los años
'80 fue el prólogo de los grandes cambios en la política económica y
exterior de la Argentina operados posteriormente, cambios catalizados
por la drástica reconfiguración del escenario internacional que implicó
el fin de la bipolaridad entre las dos superpotencias, desde la caída del
muro de Berlín hasta el derrumbe de la Unión Soviética en 1991, en
lo que se anunció como el “Nuevo Orden Mundial”.


En 1989 con la asunción del justicialista Carlos Menem como
presidente, en el contexto de la crisis hiperinflacionaria, y a
contracorriente de sus promesas electorales y de los postulados
tradicionales del peronismo (industrialistas y mercado internistas,
redistribucionistas y afines a la búsqueda de autonomía en la política
exterior) se inaugura la aplicación plena de las políticas neoliberales
con la reforma del Estado, las privatizaciones de los servicios públicos


221


MARIO RAPOPORT Y CLAUDIO SPIGUEL


y empresas estatales y la desregulación de la economía, en función de
promover la atracción de capitales extranjeros como eje fundamental
de la política económica. La aplicación del modelo neoliberal que
culminó en el plan de convertibilidad de 1991 implicó, en un proceso,
un cambio cualitativo, un verdadero punto de inflexión en la política
exterior argentina, con la adopción de las políticas de “alineamiento
automático" con los EEUU conocidas como de "relaciones carnales"
(según la ilustrativa “boutade” del canciller Di Tella) sustentadas en los
postulados del "realismo periférico”, con las conocidas implicancias
interamericanas e internacionales que ha tenido. Esta nueva política
exterior tuvo determinantes internacionales e internos. Se afianzó desde
fines de 1990 con el envío de naves argentinas a la Guerra del Golfo,
en ruptura con las tradiciones neutralistas y de defensa del principio de
no intervención, con la visita del presidente Bush en diciembre de
1990 y con las negociaciones sobre la deuda externa con Washington a
través de la aplicación del plan Brady que acompañó la efectivización
del Plan de convertibilidad en 1991.


En este proceso tuvo una incidencia decisiva la crisis rusa que
desembocó en el abortado golpe de 1991, y luego, el fin de la forma
estatal y la desintegración de la Unión Soviética, con la conversión de
Rusia en una potencia de segundo orden en el marco de la CEI. Este
proceso y el fin de la bipolaridad implicaron la culminación de un
proceso de reunificación del mercado mundial, rasgo fundamental de
la "globalización que enmarcó una nueva oleada de exportación de
capitales y un salto en la internacionalización de la economía mundial
y, también, una nueva relación de fuerzas internacionales. Así los EE
UU, única superpotencia remanente, buscaron capitalizar su supremacía
financiera y estratégico-militar para afirmar su hegemonía y la
unipolaridad en el escenario internacional, en contradicción con el
afianzamiento de la multipolaridad que lo caracterizaba en el plano
económico, con la existencia de varios centros y potencias secundarias.


A la vez, el alineamiento con Washington del gobierno de
Menem se compadecía con la relevancia adquirida por los acreedores
externos, en particular la banca norteamericana, y el rol del
endeudamiento externo en el funcionamiento de la economía argentina


222


MODELOS ECONÓMICOS, REGIMENES POLÍTICOS Y POLÍTICA EXTERIOR ARGENTINA


y en los mecanismos de acumulación de importantes núcleos del poder
económico local.


Así la nueva política exterior argentina reflejó, como corolario
de agudísimas disputas en el seno de los sectores dirigentes de 1989 a
1991, un cambio y recomposición de la hegemonía en las clases
dominantes y el poder económico local, en el que se articulaban los
socios de la banca acreedora, los sectores terratenientes agroexportadores
y grandes grupos oligopólicos intermediarios de capitales extranjeros.
De conjunto, surgió un nuevo “consenso”, que se expresó en el plano
parlamentario y político con el apoyo de las diversas corrientes peronistas
y del radicalismo a la nueva política económica e incluyó también los
acuerdos para la reforma constitucional de 1994 que permitió la
reelección de Menem. Las reformas neoliberales, sobre la base de ese
consenso, produjeron una concentración y extranjerización económica
de cuyos beneficios participaron un pequeño núcleo de oligopolios y
sectores empresarios locales.


Simultáneamente, el alineamiento con Washington reflejaba el
nuevo predominio adquirido por los grupos de interés asociados a los
EEUU en el seno del bloque de poder así reconfigurado, predominio
que no anulaba otras asociaciones internacionales como las que se
reflejaron en la mayoritaria participación europea junto con grupos
locales en la privatización de las empresas públicas.


A la vez, fue la propia adopción de la nueva política exterior de
“alineamiento automático con Washington por parte del gobierno de
Menem la que se convirtió en un importante determinante político y
estratégico para la afirmación de la nueva hegemonía estadounidense
en el espectro de relaciones internacionales y en el bloque dominante
en la economía y la sociedad argentina.


Es conocido que la política exterior del menemismo se basó en
las concepciones abiertamente dependentistas del “realismo periférico”
basadas en: a) el supuesto neoliberal de que la conexión estrecha con la
potencia hegemónica es la condición para garantizar el desarrollo
económico y la democracia en el país periférico; b) pese a su “realismo”
(en realidad "pragmatismo”) se afirma en un horizonte de ideas que
presupone que con la globalización se erosionan y pierden entidad los


223


MARIO RAPOPORT Y CLAUDIO SPIGUEL


espacios económicos y políticos nacionales así como las contradicciones
y asimetrías internacionales; c) propone una lógica de maximización
de los beneficios presuntamente resultantes de la conexión con la
potencia hegemónica, sobre la base de reducir los costos del no
alineamiento y la distancia en el terreno diplomático, costos que
devendrían de la presunta irrelevancia económica y estratégica de la
Argentina para la potencia hegemónica.


Hemos discutido en otros textos las falacias teóricas e históricas
presentes en esta concepción (incluyendo la de la presunta irrelevancia
estratégica de la Argentina para los EEUU). Lo cierto es que, mientras
la Argentina se convertía en el “mejor alumno” de los organismos
financieros internacionales y era presentado en los círculos del capital
financiero internacional y en los medios de los países desarrollados
como el modelo de “país emergente” inserto en la “globalización”, la
política exterior de alineamiento con Washington, una conducta de
"espejo" con respecto a los Estados Unidos sin precedentes en la historia
del país, implicaba en realidad, como hemos señalado también, un
retorno: la reedición, con un nuevo actor, de la “conexión especial”
con Gran Bretaña que caracterizó a la Argentina “abierta y el régimen
oligárquico de principios de siglo y el de los años '30, (conexión especial
que tampoco entonces anulaba la heterogeneidad de relaciones de distintos
sectores de las clases dominantes con diversas grandes potencias).41


La política exterior menemista respecto de EE UU interactuó
con su política económica internacional, particularmente en la relación
con los organismos financieros internacionales en los que Washington
tiene un peso decisivo, para garantizar la afluencia de capitales al país,
que fue la condición de la convertibilidad sustentada crecientemente
en un proceso de hiperendeudamiento público. Pero también la nueva
política exterior implicó la afirmación de importantes vínculos políticos
y militares que dotaron a las relaciones bilaterales de importantes
componentes estratégicos: el desmantelamiento del misil Cóndor II y


41 Ver Rapoport, M., La Argentina y Estados Unidos: Un balance descarnado. In: Tiempos
de crisis, vientos de cambio, op. cit., p. 211-214; y Rapoport, M., Historia económica política y
social de la Argentina, op. cit., p. 950-958.


224


MODELOS ECONÓMICOS, REGIMENES POLÍTICOS Y POLÍTICA EXTERIOR ARGENTINA


los proyectos de industria aeroespacial y de la defensa nacional; la
ratificación del Tratado de Tlatelolco y de No Proliferación Nuclear,
la reorientación de los votos argentinos en la ONU en línea con el
Departamento de Estado y la participación en las Fuerzas de Paz; el
retiro de la Argentina del Movimiento de No Alineados; la renuncia a
la confrontación en defensa de los intereses nacionales con relación a
las Islas Malvinas y la política de aproximación y concesiones a Gran
Bretaña, bajo la fórmula del “paraguas” respecto de la discusión sobre
la soberanía, reconociendo incluso a los kelpers como parte del conflicto
y abdicando así de postulados jurídicos favorables a la Argentina en esa
materia, de larga data y que habían obtenido reconocimiento
internacional; los votos contra Cuba en la Comisión de Derechos
Humanos de la ONU rompiendo con las posiciones argentinas
anteriores al respecto; la firma de múltiples tratados multilaterales que
relativizaban el principio de no intervención y de autodeterminación;
el anudamiento de múltiples pactos y convenios militares con ejercicios
conjuntos y presencia de efectivos norteamericanos y servicios de
inteligencia de ese origen en el territorio nacional, aún sin la aprobación
parlamentaria que la constitución requiere, culminando en la segunda
presidencia de Menem con la conversión de la Argentina en aliado
“extra OTAN”, en función de la “lucha contra el terrorismo y el
narcotráfico según los lineamientos de la estrategia norteamericana.


Todos los hechos señalados, junto con los viajes de Menem a
Washington (primer presidente peronista que visitaba los EEUU) y de
diversos funcionarios norteamericanos, comenzando por los presidentes
Bush y Clinton, a Buenos Aires y el protagonismo de los embajadores
Todman, Cheek, y más tarde Welsh, en la vida política argentina,
formaron parte y acompañaron una intensificación de los vínculos
bilaterales, gubernamentales y no gubernamentales, que adquirieron
“densidad (en términos de algunos análisis de política exterior) y
convirtieron al gobierno argentino durante un largo período en el
vocero de las posiciones estadounidenses en América del Sur. 42


42 Ver Centro de Estudios en Relaciones Internacionales de Rosario, La Política Exterior del
Gobierno de Menem, Rosario, 1994, y La Política Exterior Argentina 1994-1997, Rosario, 1998.


225


MARIO RAPOPORT Y CLAUDIO SPIGUEL


En realidad, sólo un aspecto realmente nuevo, aunque
fuertemente condicionado por el conjunto de la política económica y
exterior menemista, se potenció como una nueva dimensión en la
inserción internacional del país. Esta fue la conformación del Mercosur,
desde los acuerdos con Collor de Mello en 1990 a la firma del tratado
de Asunción a principios de 1995 y se desarrolló como un elemento
del relacionamiento del país que formó parte del nuevo consenso entre
los sectores dirigentes, aunque interactuara a veces conflictivamente
con otros aspectos de la política exterior y fuera concebido con
propósitos y concepciones estratégicas diversas por las distintas
fracciones del “establishment” argentino.


De los instrumentos inicialmente concebidos, se afirmó sobre
todo la liberalización comercial, potenciando el comercio intrarregional
y con América Latina, aunque los principales socios comerciales seguirían
siendo los EEUU y la Unión Europea. Afirmándose en la concepción
de  regionalismo abierto”, se potenció el rol de la integración regional
como factor atractivo para la inversión transnacional, en las que jugaron
un papel significativo firmas europeas. Las políticas neoliberales,
con sus planes de estabilización hasta su final con las devaluaciones,
el impacto de la crisis mundial y la ausencia de coordinación
macroeconómica condicionaron la profundidad de la integración y la
posibilidad de que incidiera en un mejor posicionamiento e inserción
internacional de los países de la región.


La propia vulnerabilidad externa de las economías integrantes
obstaculizó el avance del Mercosur, a lo que se sumaron divergencias
comerciales y discrepancias en las que incidió la propia política exterior
del gobierno de Menem y su alineamiento “automático” con los
EEUU. Esto trababa la posibilidad de convergencias en función de
una política exterior común del bloque regional y a su unidad para
potencias su autonomía. Reducido en lo esencial a una zona de libre
comercio y sobre la base de estos condicionamientos políticos, el
Mercosur podía verse reducido a un ámbito amplificador de pugnas
transnacionales a través de las alianzas extrarregionales de los países
miembros y erosionado frente a la política hemisférica de los Estados


226


MODELOS ECONÓMICOS, REGIMENES POLÍTICOS Y POLÍTICA EXTERIOR ARGENTINA


Unidos y su iniciativa de la Asociación de Libre Comercio de
América. 43


La política exterior menemista acompañó a las políticas
neoliberales que produjeron los grandes cambios económicos de la
década del '90, según el modelo de inserción internacional propugnado
por el llamado Consenso de Washington: Esos cambios profundizaron
los rasgos de atraso y dependencia que caracterizan a la estructura
económica del país, reforzando tendencias fundamentales en la
economía y la sociedad vigentes desde la implantación de la dictadura
militar en 1976. Al tiempo que se acentuó notablemente la
concentración productiva, comercial, financiera y de la propiedad de
la tierra, desaparecieron ramas enteras de la producción nacional, muchas
de ellas correspondientes a sectores de tecnología avanzada y decisivos
de un potencial desarrollo independiente de la economía argentina. La
apertura indiscriminada a la importación masiva condujo a la quiebra
a numerosas empresas industriales pequeñas y medianas en ramas
tradicionales como la metalúrgica y la textil. En el lapso de un
quinquenio fue prácticamente liquidada el área estatal de la economía.


Las consecuencias sociales son profundas y graves. Desde la crisis
provocada por el “Tequila” mejicano en 1995, se hizo visible el
incremento de la desocupación que por entonces llegaba al 17% de la
población económicamente activa (y alcanzaría pronto más del 20%)
y a partir de allí se fue agravando al compás de la crisis económica
mundial y nacional. La llamada Reforma del Estado expulsó a decenas
de miles de empleados al tiempo que las políticas de restricción
presupuestarias profundizaron la precariedad de la salud y la educación
pública. En el plano laboral, las políticas conducentes en forma explícita


43 Ver sobre el Mercosur y la política económica y exterior argentina, Ferrer, A., Los dos
modelos de Mercosur. Integración sostenible o consenso de Washington, Revista de la
Universidad de Buenos Aires, $n^{\circ}$ 6, noviembre de 1997; Bernal-Meza, Raúl, Las actuales
percepciones argentinas sobre la Política Exterior del Brasil y de sus relaciones con los
Estados Unidos. In: Ciclos en la historia, la economía y la sociedad, $n^{\circ}$ 18, Buenos Aires,
2º semestre de 1999; Rapoport, M. y colab., Historia económica, op. cit., cap. IX; Vitelli, G.,
Las rupturas de la convertibilidad y del Plan Real: la reiteración de una misma historia. In:
Ciclos en la historia, la economía y la sociedad, n° 23, Buenos Aires, $1^{er}$ semestre de 2002.


227


MARIO RAPOPORT Y CLAUDIO SPIGUEL


a eliminar, flexibilizar y hacer retroceder sustancialmente la legislación
protectora del trabajo, producto de más de un siglo de luchas obreras,
conjugadas con la fuerte presión que sobre el mercado laboral ejerce la
enorme reserva de desocupados y con la anuencia de las direcciones de
los grandes sindicatos de la industria respecto de las políticas
implementadas, han dado paso a una inédita reducción del “costo
laboral" argentino, con una intensificación sin precedentes de la
explotación de los trabajadores. La pobreza e indigencia, el hambre, la
desnutrición infantil y otros males consiguientes alcanzan niveles
inéditos para la Argentina.


Se agravó de modo notable la penetración del capital extranjero,
con la presencia directa de consorcios transnacionales y su
monopolización de casi todas las palancas decisivas de la economía
argentina en desmedro de la independencia económica del país y de su
soberanía política. Consorcios de diversos orígenes, particularmente
europeos y norteamericanos, directamente o en asociación con
intermediarios locales, han sido los principales beneficiarios de las
privatizaciones de las empresas estatales de transporte aéreo y ferroviario,
telecomunicaciones, correos, servicios de electricidad, gas, aguas
corrientes, etc., incluyendo la mayor empresa de la Argentina,
Yacimientos Petrolíferos Fiscales, hoy en manos de la española Repsol.
En la mayoría de los casos las concesiones se llevaron a cabo bajo
condiciones de privilegio – monopolio de mercado, subsidios estatales,
precios y plazos de pagos y contratos, exenciones impositivas –. Pese a
las privatizaciones y a las reducciones acordadas por el Plan Brady, la
deuda externa pública se incrementó en forma exponencial al compás
del sostenimiento de la convertibilidad y la extracción de ganancias de
la Argentina alimentada por el endeudamiento, hasta estallar en la crisis
de 2001 que culminó con el fin del régimen de convertibilidad y la
devaluación. Durante los años '90 y hasta la actualidad, los gobiernos
han subordinado casi sin mediaciones sus políticas a las recomendaciones
y exigencias del Fondo Monetario Internacional, el Banco Mundial, y
otras instituciones financieras bajo el control de las grandes potencias.


El efecto de este proceso ha sido una agudización de las
deformaciones estructurales de la economía argentina. En los primeros


228


MODELOS ECONÓMICOS, REGIMENES POLÍTICOS Y POLÍTICA EXTERIOR ARGENTINA


años el crecimiento del producto bruto tuvo como contrapartida una
ingente destrucción de fuerzas productivas, la asfixia de economías
regionales y transformaciones profundamente regresivas en el tejido
social. Con el estallido de la crisis económica, potenciada por la crisis
mundial que ha impactado de lleno, particularmente desde 1998, sobre
una estructura económica más vulnerable y dependiente que nunca, se
abrió paso una prolongada recesión que está en la base de la crisis social
y política argentina, la más profunda de la historia nacional.


A su vez, la concentración económica ha conllevado una paralela
concentración del poder político que  pese a la vigencia de las
instituciones formales de la democracia – se fue manifestando por un
lado en la enajenación de esas instituciones respecto de la capacidad de
decisión y participación de vastísimos sectores de la población y por el
otro en los crecientes fenómenos de corrupción económica y política
que han moldeado el aparato estatal y el funcionamiento global de la
economía.


En los primeros años de la década del 1990, el “modelo neoliberal”
y sus consecuencias pudieron imponerse apoyándose en el temor de
grandes mayoría populares al retorno de la hiperinflación y a una
inestabilidad institucional que abriera las puertas a nuevos golpes de
estado, y en el contexto de la gigantesca oleada ideológica internacional,
que a escala nacional se apoyaba en el nuevo “consenso” entre los sectores
dirigentes, que presentaba ese “modelo” económico y de inserción en
la "globalización y el “nuevo orden mundial”, así como al pensamiento
que lo legitimaba, como el único posible. Sin embargo, y a partir de
fines de 1993, con el estallido de una rebelión popular en la ciudad de
Santiago del Estero, emergió un gran descontento social que, en un
proceso zigzaguente y en espiral, mediado por la reelección de Menem
en 1995, potenció el desarrollo de agudos conflictos sociales y amplios
movimientos populares de protesta y oposición a las políticas vigentes. 44


44 Ver Laufer, R. y Spiguel, C., Las puebladas argentinas a partir del Santiagueñazo de 1993.
Tradición histórica y nuevas formas de lucha. In: López Maya, M. (comp.), Lucha popular,
democracia, neoliberalismo: protesta popular en América Latina en los años de ajuste, CEAP  
CENDES, Caracas: Universidad Central de Venezuela, 1999.


229


MARIO RAPOPORT Y CLAUDIO SPIGUEL


Se profundizó así la “crisis de credibilidad” de las autoridades y
representantes electos. Sucede que el desarrollo de los movimientos
sociales de oposición no se tradujo en cambios en el sistema político.
Se fue revelando y ahondando una escisión profunda entre las
necesidades, demandas y la actividad de los movimientos populares y
la esfera electoral, parlamentaria y del sistema de partidos del régimen
constitucional argentino instituido desde 1983.


Tal escisión remite a dos factores: Por un lado la subordinación
absoluta de las instituciones republicanas respecto de un poder
económico y político extremadamente concentrado que impone
márgenes programáticos y mecanismos de acción política cada vez más
contradictorios con las demandas populares. Sobre el trasfondo
socioeconómico arriba descripto se produce una fractura entre
representante y representado. Pero no se trata sólo de la impotencia de
las instituciones y funcionarios electos frente al poder económico y
político real, que determina que las decisiones se toman entre bastidores
en otras áreas del aparato estatal (Ministerio de Economía y Banco
Central, el aparato judicial) en acuerdos con diversos intereses del
“establishment e incluso embajadas extranjeras. También implica la
cooptación manifiesta de corrientes políticas y representantes electivos,
desde las propias candidaturas y campañas electorales hasta la gestión
legislativa y de gobierno, fenómeno al que es funcional la descomunal
corrupción de los funcionarios. 45


Así, el resultado fue que el modelo económico y de inserción
internacional, en los marcos del “consenso antes señalado en el seno
de los sectores dirigentes, fue defendido a rajatabla por los gobiernos y
no fue cuestionado en sus fundamentos por la Alianza radical y del
centro izquierdista Frepaso en su oposición al menemismo,
(prometiendo enfrentar la corrupción y procurar mayor equidad social,
pero también conservar los “logros del modelo) ni por la oposición


45 Los individuos sólo son ciudadanos una vez cada cuatro, cinco o seis años, pero no tienen
ningún control sobre sus representantes políticos, que están sujetos, sin embargo, a los
intereses dominantes, internos y externos, a quienes rinden cuentas y con quienes cogobiernan.
La corrupción se ha transformado así en un rasgo estructural. Rapoport, M., La tensa
alquimia entre capitalismo y democracia. In: Tiempos de crisis, op. cit., p. 265-266.


230


MODELOS ECONÓMICOS, REGIMENES POLÍTICOS Y POLÍTICA EXTERIOR ARGENTINA


de las corrientes peronistas no menemistas al gobierno aliancista de De
la Rúa. Tales fenómenos determinaron la contradicción cada vez más
aguda entre demandas sociales y régimen político y conformaron el
terreno para la creciente desconfianza en los mecanismos electorales y
en las instituciones representativas para satisfacerlas. Ello se reflejó, sobre
todo luego de la reelección de Menem en 1995, en los crecientes niveles
de abstencionismo electoral, anulación del voto y el voto en blanco,
niveles que llegaron a un pico de más del 50% del padrón en las
elecciones de octubre de 2001, tiñendo el escenario político de los
sucesos de diciembre.


Desde fines de 1999, ya en plena crisis mundial y nacional, el
gobierno de la Alianza, pese a expresar a otras fracciones de los sectores
dirigentes y pivotear sobre otros vínculos internacionales, continuó
con la misma política económica, subordinándola a la conservación de
la convertibilidad y a las negociaciones con el FMI y la banca acreedora,
en el marco de la manifestación de la crisis norteamericana desde fines
de 2000 y de las nuevas políticas “duras” de la administración
republicana. En consecuencia se profundizó la crisis económica, se
potenció y generalizó la crisis y la protesta social, entrelazándose con la
crisis política abierta en la coalición gubernamental a partir de la renuncia
del vicepresidente Chacho Alvarez.


Así, en el año 2001, pese a las sucesivas renegociaciones con los
organismos financieros internacionales y la banca, a costa de nuevos
saltos en el endeudamiento externo e interno del Estado, al hacerse
evidente el naufragio del esquema de convertibilidad, la Argentina
experimentó un masivo retiro de capitales del país, mientras el gobierno
de De la Rua y su nuevo ministro Cavallo (ex-ministro de Menem y
factotum de la convertibilidad y del “modelo”) tomaban crecientes
medidas antipopulares y de asfixia del mercado interno, con quitas
salariales a estatales y jubilados, culminando en diciembre con la
bancarización forzosa y el congelamiento de depósitos. Eclosionó el
hambre generalizada y la indigencia. A lo largo del año y pese a intentos
represivos del gobierno, las organizaciones y movimientos de
desocupados (los llamados “piqueteros”) se constituyeron en centros
convocantes y potenciaron un amplísimo movimiento de protesta,


231


MARIO RAPOPORT Y CLAUDIO SPIGUEL


que abarcó a obreros activos, trabajadores estatales y docentes,
productores agropecuarios, comerciantes y pequeños industriales, etc.


En diciembre, las medidas del gobierno, en su defensa a ultranza
del "modelo", afectaron a más del 90% de la población. Al mismo
tiempo las fisuras en el seno del bloque económico dominante se
convirtieron en fractura abierta: un sector, en el que predominaban
bancos extranjeros, empresas de servicios públicos e intereses financieros,
exigía la represión de las protestas y la conservación a ultranza de la
convertibilidad. El ex-presidente Menem pedía incluso desde hacía
tiempo la dolarización (completa) de la economía. Otro sector de
oligopolios, en lo esencial exportadores, con peso en la Unión Industrial,
se orientaba a la devaluación, llamaba a un gobierno de “unidad
nacional y preparaba un recambio ordenado del gobierno, motorizado
por corrientes del radicalismo y del peronismo no menemista con
predominio en el Congreso. 46


En ese contexto, eclosionó la rebelión popular de diciembre. El
19 de ese mes el gobierno, sobre la base de saqueos a supermercados
que habían empezado a producirse en diversos puntos del país y el
conurbano bonaerense y montando un operativo mediático, represivo
y de manipulación política dirigido a legitimar la represión, decretó el
Estado de Sitio. El discurso presidencial por TV detonó, como un
boomerang, una gigantesca manifestación popular en la Capital, con
alta participación de asalariados y capas medias urbanas de histórica
tradición democrática. Centenares de miles de personas, simultánea y
espontáneamente, salieron a las calles haciendo sonar cacerolas y
marcharon a la Plaza de Mayo, exigiendo la derogación de la medida y
el fin del gobierno de De La Rúa y Cavallo. La respuesta represiva, que
produjo a esa manifestación pacífica generalizó los enfrentamientos
callejeros en el centro de la ciudad del día 20 y la protesta nacional,
culminando con la renuncia del presidente.


Por primera vez en la historia argentina, un gobierno civil, electo
constitucionalmente, era derribado no por un golpe de estado militar
sino por la población en las calles, desbordando la represión y los planes


46 Ver Bonasso, M., El palacio y la calle, Buenos Aires, 2002.


232


MODELOS ECONÓMICOS, REGIMENES POLÍTICOS Y POLÍTICA EXTERIOR ARGENTINA


de recambio ordenado de un sector de la dirigencia, (que mantuvo la
continuidad institucional a través de la Asamblea legislativa y culminó,
tras agudas disputas y cuatro presidentes, en el nuevo gobierno
provisorio en el contexto de una aguda “crisis de hegemonía”). Las
elecciones democráticas de abril y mayo de 2003, con fuerte
participación popular y que significaron un castigo a los propulsores
menemistas y radicales del modelo “rentístico-financiero” neoliberal,
vuelven a hacer renacer la esperanza de una salida de la crisis.


De todos modos, vivimos un “fin de régimen : lo viejo, en
descomposición, aún no muere; lo nuevo aún no logra imponerse.
Frente al requerimiento social de cambios profundos, en la economía,
la sociedad y en el poder, se cierne la losa de una deuda externa impagable
y horizontes de extranjerización de tierras (previa privatización de la
banca pública, depositaria de hipotecas por 24 millones de hectáreas),
conjugados con planes represivos, en los que resuenan las
recomendaciones para América del Sur de diversos “think tanks”
imperiales, propuestas de gobiernos “offshore” con intervención de
organismos financieros internacionales y resignación de la soberanía
estatal, noticias propagadas en medios de difusión internacionales sobre
una posible segregación territorial de la Patagonia, cesión de bases
militares, etc.


Ante a esas sombrías perspectivas, la democratización de la
sociedad y del poder se encuentra entrelazada a la necesidad de afirmar
una política exterior independiente. A contracorriente de las recetas
“globalizadoras y la retórica que acompaña las aventuras imperiales
del presente, toda la historia de la Argentina, y particularmente su historia
reciente, revelan que la independencia y soberanía de las naciones
periféricas, con base en su autonomía económica, es una condición
fundamental para garantizar la democracia.


Todo ello requiere en la Argentina un nuevo Estado que haga
posible el cumplimiento de esos objetivos en sus relaciones con todos
los pueblos y naciones del mundo. Sin duda, aunque emerge en
contradicción con los vientos de la guerra, la agresión imperial y las
perspectivas catastróficas de un orden internacional injusto y despótico,
el reclamo histórico que surgió de los movimientos sociales argentinos,


233


MARIO RAPOPORT Y CLAUDIO SPIGUEL


tiene su espejo, caja de resonancia y punto de apoyo en los refrescantes
vientos de cambio en las sociedades de los países hermanos de América
del Sur. Por eso requiere de la confluencia, la unidad y la integración,
particularmente entre los países que hoy se encuentran articulados en
el Mercosur, y en modo particular Brasil (con el cual debe cimentarse
la alianza estratégica en el continente), en tanto enfrentan los mismo
desafíos y obstáculos. También será a partir de afirmar esos cambios,
ese reclamo de democracia y soberanía nacional, como se podrá afirmar
esa unidad e integración regional en un espacio común, frente a la
crisis económica mundial, las amenazas de la ofensiva mundial y
hemisférica de los Estados Unidos y la agudizada rivalidad estratégica
internacional que han condicionado el desarrollo del Mercosur. 47


VIII. ALGUNAS REFLEXIONES A MODO DE CONCLUSIÓN


El análisis histórico revela que la inserción internacional de la
Argentina y las relaciones de sus clases dirigentes con diversos centros
financieros y grandes potencias, pese al predominio en diversos períodos
de la conexión con una potencia hegemónica, ha operado como un
elemento determinante y permanente en las pugnas en el seno de las
elites tradicionales y del poder económico local, en torno a las políticas
económicas, a la orientación de la inserción internacional del país y al
control del aparato estatal. Ha sido también un elemento determinante
de las luchas en torno a la política exterior del país. Estas pugnas han
contribuido, sobre todo en ciertas coyunturas, como las guerras, en
que se agudiza la competencia y rivalidad estratégica internacional, al
fraccionamiento de las clases dominantes y han debilitado su cohesión
y la del aparato estatal frente al resto de la sociedad. Ello hizo posible a
fuerzas sociales y corrientes políticas reformistas pugnar por acceder al
gobierno y promover cambios políticos y económicos. También se
manifiesta que ello fue posible sobre la base del apoyo y el protagonismo


47 Un enfoque que coincide mayormente con el nuestro es el de Moniz Bandeira L. A.
Conflito e Integração na América do Sul. Brasil, Argentina e Estados Unidos. Da Tríplice Aliança
ao Mercosul 1870-2003, Rio de Janeiro, 2003.


234


MODELOS ECONÓMICOS, REGIMENES POLÍTICOS Y POLÍTICA EXTERIOR ARGENTINA


popular y en el marco de objetivos propios, de mayor autonomía
económica y política del país. Por el contrario, en la medida que el
escenario político y social quedó determinado por esas pugnas entre
distintas fracciones de las clases dirigentes como expresión de la
“diversificación de la dependencia”, ello contribuyó a un ahondamiento
de la misma, a la subordinación de la nación como objeto de la disputa
por esferas de influencia y a la consolidación de regímenes autoritarios
funcionales a la afirmación de una u otra hegemonía en el seno del
Estado dependiente, en desmedro de la democracia y de los intereses
populares.


La búsqueda de mayores grados de independencia económica y
las políticas exteriores autonómicas ha remitido recíprocamente a la
existencia de condiciones para el ejercicio real de la democracia y la
expresión de la voluntad popular. Así, en la vida política argentina
ambas problemáticas, la de la democracia y la de la independencia
nacional, se han entrelazado y resultan en última instancia indisociables,
aún cuando en ocasiones se expresaron en corrientes políticas e
ideológicas que privilegiaban una u otra cuestión y pese a que
frecuentemente las clases dirigentes y la operatoria de potencias e
intereses extranjeros en el campo político y del pensamiento las hayan
presentado y las sigan presentando incluso como contrapuestas.


A su vez, el caso paradigmático de la guerra de Malvinas
demuestra que la defensa consecuente de los intereses nacionales y de
la soberanía resulta imposible sin la efectivización de una
democratización plena de la sociedad y del poder, en el sentido elemental
de la participación de las mayorías populares en la toma de decisiones.
También demuestra, con la génesis de los golpes de Estado o el periplo
del régimen constitucional argentino desde 1983 hasta el presente, que
no puede haber democracia profunda, real y asegurada sin la afirmación
de la soberanía de la nación sobre sus recursos y decisiones.


235


9


POLÍTICA EXTERIOR DE ARGENTINA, CHILE Y
BRASIL: PERSPECTIVA COMPARADA


Raúl Bernal-Meza


INTRODUCCIÓN


Los tres países aquí analizados, así como el conjunto de estados
del sistema latinoamericano vivieron el período bajo el impacto de los
profundos cambio ocurridos en la economía y la política mundiales,
sintetizados en los procesos de globalización/mundialización¹ y el
cambio de orden internacional: fin de la guerra fría y su sustitución
por un orden unipolar de hegemonía.


Estos cambios introdujeron sustanciales modificaciones en las
estrategias internas e internacionales sobre el desarrollo, preocupación
que durante los años ochenta estuvo asociada a “nuevos temas”, como
la democratización.


La recuperación de la democracia y los procesos de transición
hacia este régimen político había sido, desde entonces, cuestión clave
de un modelo de diplomacia: la concertación entre gobiernos para la
búsqueda de soluciones pacíficas a los conflictos limítrofes y la


1 Como otros autores, entre ellos Immanuel Wallerstein y Aldo Ferrer, consideramos la
globalización como el proceso histórico de expansión capitalista, que se inicia entre fines del
siglo XV y comienzos del XVI. Desde mi perspectiva, identificamos la “mundialización”
como el eslabón más actual de la misma. Nuestra diferencia respecto de otros autores es que
designamos el concepto de "mundialización” para identificar el proceso que da cuenta de las
nuevas formas que ha asumido la acumulación capitalista en la fase contemporánea y
comprendemos el concepto de "globalización como aquel que incorpora tanto al proceso
histórico completo (siglos XVI al XXI) como al complejo de ideas y la concepción del
mundo que ahora acompañan su más reciente etapa; es decir, sus componentes tanto
económicos (proceso histórico), como su ideología. Cfr, Raúl Bernal-Meza, Sistema Mundial
y Mercosur; Buenos Aires, Universidad Nacional del Centro de la Provincia de Buenos Aires
y Nuevohacer/Grupo Editor Latinoamericano, 2000; primera parte, caps. I y II.


237


RAÚL BERNAL-MEZA


formulación de nuevas estrategias de cooperación e integración. Con
ello, la agenda latinoamericana se había transformado en un mix de
temas políticos y económicos.


La "diplomacia presidencial y la de “cumbres”, marcaron un
hito en las formas de vinculación tradicional entre los países
latinoamericanos. Así, a partir de mediados de los años '80s. la
diplomacia presidencial – una práctica que en la política internacional
se remonta al Congreso de Viena y que acercó a los mandatarios de
América Latina al ejercicio político de los estadistas mundiales
se
constituyó en un mecanismo clave para un permanente diálogo político
entre gobiernos democráticos.


Se advertiría entonces un rasgo predominante en las políticas
exteriores de la región, que se fue perfilando poco a poco hasta convertirse
en una característica de la mayoría de las políticas exteriores: la
derivación hacia el “bajo perfil” y el “pragmatismo” y la presencia cada
vez más significativa de una agenda de baja política.


Como ocurrió con otros países de América Latina, la Argentina
y Brasil abandonaron el paradigma de relaciones internacionales
del Estado-desarrollista, adoptando el paradigma neoliberal, cuyas
reformas implícitas fueron rápidas y radicales (Bernal-Meza, 2000;
Cervo, 2000). El modelo de apertura había sido iniciado por Chile a
mediados de los años setenta, bajo el régimen militar, y se constituiría
en el paradigma de la nueva inserción internacional. Obviamente, el
cambio de modelo implicaba una reformulación de las anteriores
concepciones sobre la integración económica y, bajo el impulso del
neoliberalismo, el regionalismo abiertose transformó en el marco teórico
dominante de la apertura y de los nuevos acuerdos de complementación
económica.


La apertura, la predominancia del pensamiento neoliberal en la
política pública y el regionalismo abierto estaban en relación directa
con el abandono de las concepciones keynesianas y neo-keynesianas
del desarrollo económico y establecían nuevas formas de inserción
externa.


El eje de la “nueva agenda de la política exterior de los noventa
lo constituyó la adopción integral de los “valores hegemónicos


238


POLÍTICA EXTERIOR DE ARGENTINA, CHILE Y BRASIL: PERSPECTIVA COMPARADA


universalmente aceptados”,2 porque de ellos resultaba el prestigio, la
credibilidad y la confiabilidad externas. Estos valores, impuestos por
el orden imperial configurado por la post-guerra fría, significaban una
confluencia de democracia (formal) y libre mercado, bajo una
extraordinaria hegemonía ideológica del neoliberalismo, que se reflejaría
en múltiples segmentos del sistema internacional. Así, el “Consenso
de Washington (1989), la “Iniciativa para las Américas” (1990) – de
la que derivaría el proyecto Alca – y la constitución de la OMC, junto
a las nuevas disciplinas, que establecieron las normativas a las cuales
debían ajustarse las políticas públicas, incluyendo el comercio
internacional y las regulaciones financieras, pasaron a constituir los
marcos según los cuales los gobiernos que los hicieron suyos,
reformularon sus orientaciones y praxis de política exterior.


1. POLÍTICA EXTERIOR ARGENTINA


Después de una política exterior signada por el aislamiento, la
ruptura y las contradicciones, que caracterizó el período del gobierno
militar (1976-1983), el siguiente gobierno, constitucional y
democrático, presidido por Raúl Alfonsín, introdujo tres cambios
importantes respecto de los criterios ordenadores de la política exterior
del régimen militar: 1) el desplazamiento del modelo Este-Oeste y la
resignificación de la “occidentalidad de Argentina (diferenciar entre
los intereses del bloque y los intereses de Argentina³); 2) reformulación
de la participación en No Alineados, cuestión que se fundamentaba en


2 Hemos definido éstos como aquellos que constituyen la esencia de la agenda post-guerra
fría, bajo el orden imperial, que sustituyeron los temas relevantes de la agenda internacional
de los años 70 y 80. Estos valores, que sustentan ahora la nueva configuración del sistema
internacional, como el liberalismo económico, los derechos humanos, la protección ambiental,
los derechos sociales, junto a los temas militar-estratégicos – bajo nuevas formas, vinculadas
a los nuevos conceptos de la seguridad – excluyen el tema del "desarrollo". Cfr. Raúl Bernal-
Meza (2000:91-92). Asimismo, constituyen el fundamento de los instrumentos para mejorar
- supuestamente  la inserción internacional de los países en desarrollo, bajo el nuevo orden
político y económico de la globalización. Bernal-Meza, 2000:155. Algunos autores los han
definido como "valores hegemónicos internacionalmente reconocidos". Vigevani, et. al, 1999.
En forma llamativamente similar a la que se formuló en Brasil con el "pragmatismo
ecuménico responsable"; cfr. Raúl Bernal-Meza, 2000.


239


RAÚL BERNAL-MEZA


la percepción del gobierno sobre la existencia de una confrontación de
carácter “realista” entre dos grandes poderes y no de una “guerra santa”,
en la cual se involucraba todo occidente, lo que daba espacio a la
continuidad de la permanencia del país en dicho foro; 3) revalorización
del eje Norte-Sur (Russell,1989), siendo este último segmento
considerado el espacio natural y apropiado para la búsqueda de
convergencias entre determinados intereses políticos y económicos del
país y los de otras naciones del Tercer Mundo, aún cuando estas
relaciones fueran pasadas por el tamiz de las “alianzas selectivas”.


El marco determinante de la política exterior y su relación con
la política interna fue una concepción predominantemente
“
desarrollista”. 4 Esta interpretación sería abandonada al comenzar los
'90s., bajo la nueva visión del mundo que traía consigo la comunidad
epistémicas del menemismo (Bernal-Meza, 2000).


En este contexto, “el país (en realidad debería decir el gobierno)
modifica su concepción del mundo, realiza un profundo viraje en su
orientación internacional y define una nueva política exterior” (De la
Balze;1997:107). Esto llevaba implícita una adhesión a la alianza
occidental y sus principios de democracia y libre mercado y la búsqueda
de una alianza estratégica y de largo plazo con la potencia hegemónica.


4 El sentido que damos aquí al desarrollismo deriva de las interpretaciones sobre el proceso
de transformaciones del sistema mundial y de las políticas nacionales necesarias para enfrentar
sus desafíos. Esta visión mantenía continuidades como el neo-keynesianismo, respecto del
papel del Estado como conductor del desarrollo y actor esencial de la asignación de recursos
y del realismo, en la percepción de las características de un sistema internacional dominado
por los imperativos del poder.


5 Desarrollado por Peter Haas, bajo la denominación de “comunidades epistémicas",
cfr. P. Haas, "Introduction: epistemic Communities and International Policy Coordination ,
International Organization, 46, winter 1992, el concepto ha sido tomado por Amado Luiz
Cervo, para aplicarlo al conjunto de intelectuales, académicos y diplomáticos argentinos
que con sus aportes ayudaron a formular la base de sustentación ideológica de la política
exterior de Menem, que fuera implementada por lo cancilleres Cavallo y Di Tella, Bernal-
Meza, 2000:353.


Todos ellos, según Cervo, tenían en común una visión revisionista de la historia argentina.
Estaba integrada, entre otros, por Tulio Halperin Donghi, Carlos Escudé, Felipe de la Balze,
Jorge Castro y Andrés Cisneros. Cfr. Amado Luiz Cervo, A política Exterior da Argentina
1945-2000, Anuário de Política Internacional, Brasília, IPRI, mimeo, 1999; también,
Cervo, 2000.


240


POLÍTICA EXTERIOR DE ARGENTINA, CHILE Y BRASIL: PERSPECTIVA COMPARADA


En términos de seguridad, la adopción de los nuevos marcos de
seguridad "cooperativa”, impulsada por los Estados Unidos, implicaba
la renuncia a la construcción de misiles y, en general, al armamento
químico, atómico y bacteriológico.


Pero estos cambios en la política exterior eran consecuencia de la
adopción del nuevo modelo de Estado. Bajo la adscripción al
neoliberalismo se reformularon las concepciones y las políticas
gubernamentales dominantes en el pasado: 1) se abandonaron,
definitivamente, las estrategias de sustitución de importaciones, que
ya venían en crisis desde mediados de los setenta;6 2) se reformuló el
papel del Estado y de las relaciones económicas y comerciales
internacionales del país; 3) se adoptó la interpretación según la cual los
problemas argentinos eran de naturaleza puramente económica. Por lo
tanto, en términos de la política interna, se supuso agotado el modelo
económico desarrollista/estatista y, en términos del contexto externo
para la política exterior, la globalización había disminuido las opciones
y alternativas posibles. Esta interpretación era una visión ideológica y
fundamentalista de la globalización.7


La adopción de esta nueva alternativa, como estrategia de
desarrollo, implicaba – en términos de política exterior  tres posiciones
básicas: 1) una alianza con las potencias vencedoras de la guerra fría y
un alineamiento con el hegemón, lo que conducía, naturalmente, al
retiro del movimiento de los No Alineados; 2) aceptación de las nuevas
reglas de juego de la economía y la política mundiales en la construcción
del “nuevo orden”, que sería el determinado por las grandes potencias
capitalistas. Este cambio implicaba adscripción a la agenda de “valores
hegemónicos universalmente aceptados”, especialmente en lo que se
refería a las políticas de seguridad y los alineamientos en los distintos
regímenes internacionales; 3) profundización de los vínculos
transnacionales de Argentina, ante la evidencia de encontrarnos frente


6 Si bien bajo la gestión de Alfonsín se había comenzado a reformular el rol del Estado, sobre
todo desde el ministerio conducido por Terragno, con Menem el proceso de reforma y
privatizaciones del Estado se acelera, bajo el paradigma neoliberal.


7 Para la interpretación "fundamentalista"o "ideológica de la globalización, ver Ferrer
(1998) y Bernal-Meza (1996; 2000), respectivamente.


241


RAÚL BERNAL-MEZA


a un mundo "global”, lo que implicaba adhesión a las estrategias
mundiales del capitalismo transnacional (Bernal-Meza, 2000).


La Argentina, viéndose a sí misma como un país pequeño en el
escenario internacional (según la visión de la comunidad epistémica),
dio prioridad a la inserción en el mercado internacional de capitales, a
partir de la evidencia de que esos flujos eran determinantes en su ciclo
económico (Baumann, 2001:61), adoptando entonces políticas
adecuadas a esa estrategia de inserción externa. El plan de
“Convertibilidad” sería un elemento clave de ésta, que, como se verá,
De la Rúa mantendría bajo su gestión. Como describió un economista
argentino, “el propósito de la convertibilidad fue corporizar el mito
neoliberal de la economía de mercado globalizada (...); se trataba de
recomponer un modelo de acumulación basado en la renta financiera,
la extranjerización y el aplastamiento de cualquier resistencia social e
intelectual a los designios del capital más concentrado” (Sevares,
2002:59).


En términos de “variables” de la política exterior, de las externas
fueron representativas: el carácter e ideología de la nueva alianza
gobernante; su visión del mundo y el papel relevante de los actores y la
comunidad epistémica que formulaban la política exterior; la posición
respecto de las estrategias posibles de desarrollo; la cultura política
dominante (nacionalismo territorial, vocación hegemónica o de
liderazgo subregional y regional y los marcos institucionales:
centralismo, presidencialismo y personalismo). De las variables
externas: la nueva configuración del orden mundial y la agenda política
internacional, con la predominancia de los temas económicos, que
excluían todas la variables exógenas del desarrollo (dependencia
científico-tecnológica y apartheid tecnológico; hegemonía ideológico-
cultural y su visión liberal-conservadora – en los términos “modernidad”
versus “tradicionalismo” – sobre la naturaleza del desarrollo y el
progreso).


8 Ver, a este respecto, Raúl Bernal-Meza, América Latina en la Economía Política Mundial
(1994); segunda parte, cap. 1.


242


POLÍTICA EXTERIOR DE ARGENTINA, CHILE Y BRASIL: PERSPECTIVA COMPARADA


La continuidad del modelo económico y del paradigma de
política exterior resultaron un fracaso, a la luz de los resultados y de la
situación por la que atraviesa la Argentina.


La especificidad de la crisis del caso argentino se caracteriza,
básicamente, por tres elementos: 1) el fracaso de sus tres modelos de
inserción internacional a través de su historia (Bernal-Meza, 2001;
2001ª); 2) la crisis del modelo neoliberal (1976-2002): la nueva
inserción, abandonando el modelo industrialista, “desindustrializó" el
país, a través de la apertura, la desregulación, la transferencia del capital
nacional (público y privado) al capital transnacional; por vía de las
privatizaciones y la venta de activos y la aplicación de un sistema
monetario de retorno al “patrón oro”, denominado la “Convertibilidad”;
3) el cambio de paradigma en política exterior, con la imposición del
"realismo periférico”.


Tal como ha ocurrido en otros ejemplos regionales, se ha
evidenciado un conflicto entre la calidad de la decisión previa en política
exterior y su viabilidad en la práctica. En el caso argentino, el
fundamento de esta dicotomía se basa en el sustento macropolítico de
la gestión internacional; es decir, en la continuidad del paradigma de
política exterior. Con diversas argumentaciones, los tres gobiernos del
período (Menem, De la Rúa y Duhalde), buscaron hacer de Estados
Unidos el principal socio externo. Pero, en la medida que las agendas
externas de Washington y de Brasilia no coincidían, sería complejo el
relacionamiento con Brasil y, por ende, difícil los progresos también
en el contexto del Mercosur.


De las que fueron definidas en los  90s. como  políticas de
Estado  Brasil, Mercosur, Chile – sólo en este último caso puede
hablarse de “continuidad”. Ha habido, así, una línea permanente de
política exterior; bajo gobiernos democráticos que siguieron a la
transición presidida por Alfonsín, que – positivamente en este caso
también se mantuvo en las relaciones bilaterales con Chile.


La política exterior de continuidad (1989-2003), sustentada en
el paradigma del realismo periférico, a la luz de la situación de crisis
por la que atraviesa la Argentina, presenta escasos logros. Sin embargo,
la continuidad del paradigma de política exterior y del alineamiento


243


RAÚL BERNAL-MEZA


con Estados Unidos no han sido resultado de la preeminencia del
pensamiento de la comunidad epistémica, sino, esencialmente, de la
continuidad del modelo económico al cual él ha sido funcional; modelo
que ha sido mantenido por las mismas alianzas de poder, que siguen
sosteniendo una inserción externa que privilegia los lazos con el sector
financiero.


2. POLÍTICA EXTERIOR BRASILEÑA


Después de un período de marcado dinamismo en política
exterior, caracterizado por el “pragmatismo ecuménico responsable”
(apertura a África; participación activa en las agendas del mundo en
desarrollo, etc.), que acompañaba la gran expansión del modelo de
industrialización y exportación de manufacturas de los años 70's., con
un fuerte crecimiento económico, cambios internos y externos llevaron
a una sensación de estancamiento y decadencia de estas estrategias. Brasil
comenzó a vivir una etapa crítica, donde ambas estrategias evidenciaron
su agotamiento. En efecto, el modelo de política exterior de la década
de 1980, de las presidencias Figueiredo y Sarney, asociado al “desarrollo
nacional había evolucionado hacia una fase de crisis y contradicciones
(Cervo & Bueno, 1992; Cervo, 1994).


Durante los años 70's y 80's la diplomacia brasileña tuvo poco
margen de iniciativa en la mayoría de cuestiones relevantes
internacionalmente y fue condenada a reaccionar a embestidas del
exterior, las cuales no podía prever ni controlar, haciendo que en el
período la política externa fuera básicamente reactiva y defensiva
(Guilhon Albuquerque, 2000; 2001). A pesar de esas limitaciones, el
gobierno de Sarney sería el último del siglo en identificar la política
externa con el  tercermundismo".


A partir de los años 90, Brasil imprimió orientaciones confusas,
incluso contradictorias en materia de política exterior (Cervo, 2002).
La razón de ello se encontraba en la falta de decisión acerca de un
modelo definido de desarrollo nacional al cual sirviera la política
internacional. La indefinición respecto del modelo de Estado, la
agonía del modelo desenvolvimentista y la emergencia del Estado


244


POLÍTICA EXTERIOR DE ARGENTINA, CHILE Y BRASIL: PERSPECTIVA COMPARADA


normal, llevarían a una política exterior falta de coherencia y de
iniciativas, con predominio de la “baja política”.


De la transición democrática iniciada durante la década anterior
surgiría – como ejemplo de gran renovación –un cambio fundamental
en las relaciones bilaterales con Argentina y, en general, hacia América
del Sur: Brasil encontraba su perfil latinoamericano, sustituyendo las
políticas y percepciones de conflicto y rivalidad por las de cooperación
y concertación (Bernal-Meza, 1989; 2000). Esta política sería
continuada por Collor, impulsando un modelo liberal de integración
el Mercosur  y que Itamar Franco buscaría reformular bajo
perspectivas más amplias, en términos regionales.


Los ámbitos privilegiados de acción serían dos; cada uno reflejado
en la propuesta de nuevos objetivos políticos. El primero fue Naciones
Unidas, escenario hacia el cual Brasil se acercaba desde su nuevo
(asumido) rol de “potencia media”, proponiendo su propia candidatura
a miembro permanente del Consejo de Seguridad de la ONU; el segundo,
América del Sur, donde se avanzaría desde dos líneas: la propuesta de
creación de ALCSA (Acuerdo de Libre Comercio Sud Americano) y el
relanzamiento de la cooperación económica y de integración en
infraestructura con Venezuela, Colombia, Uruguay y Bolivia.


La propuesta de creación de ALCSA (realizada en Santiago de
Chile en 1994 por el propio Franco) – en la práctica una extensión del
Mercosur - tenía necesaria e inmediatamente una lectura en relación a
los Estados Unidos: fue una propuesta alternativa a la creación de Alca.
Sin embargo, además, ella reflejaba la sensación de que las relaciones
con Estados Unidos se profundizaban negativamente, en torno a temas
claves de la agenda bilateral: propiedad intelectual, medio ambiente,
derechos humanos, papel de los militares en la conducción política de
la agenda de la seguridad, etc. Este es el escenario de propuestas,
iniciativas y percepciones que encuentra Cardoso a su llegada al gobierno,
si bien él había conducido en su calidad de canciller – la política
exterior de Itamar Franco y, por tanto, la transición de la misma desde


9 Según la definición de Amado Luiz Cervo, para identificar el tipo de Estado que impulsó,
como mayor ejemplo latinoamericano, el neoliberalismo argentino, bajo las dos presidencias
de Carlos Menem. Cfr. Cervo (1994; 2000; 2001; 2002).


245


RAÚL BERNAL-MEZA


el “tercermundismo” al “pro-occidentalismo y, en particular, a un
acercamiento político con Estados Unidos.


Desde comienzos de los 90's la apertura, la flexibilidad frente a
las demandas de las grandes potencias capitalistas – en particular las
provenientes de Estados Unidos – comenzaron a identificar el cambio
de posición frente al multilateralismo. Brasil se disocia de la posición
del conjunto de países en desarrollo, en particular respecto del
cuestionamiento global del orden económico internacional, aún
cuando se critican algunas políticas de los países industrializados
(proteccionismo comercial y restricción a la difusión de tecnologías de
punta).


Demostrações de boa vontade na relação com os Estados
Unidos estavam sendo feitas nos inícios dos anos 90, quando a lei
de patentes já tramitava no Senado Federal desde 1993 havendo
ainda dois projetos de lei sobre direitos autorais, enquanto a nova
lei brasileira de propriedade industrial $(n^{o}824/91)$ tinha sido
aprovada pela Câmara dos Deputados em junho do mesmo ano
(Miyamoto, 2000:128).


Estos cambios se asociaban a la idea de cambio, eje ordenador
del "Estado normal".


246


Como señala un autor,


a emergência do Estado normal  subserviente, destrutivo e
regressivo nas estratégias de relações internacionais do Brasil
teve como impulso conceitual a idéia de mudança. Não se trata
de uma leviandade mental, mas de uma convicção profundamente
arraigada na mentalidade de dirigentes brasileiros, capaz de
provocar: a) o revisionismo histórico e a condenação das estratégias
internacionais do passado; b) a adoção acrítica de uma ideologia
imposta pelos centros hegemônicos de poder; c) a eliminação das
idéias de projeto e interesse nacionais; d) a correção do movimento
da diplomacia. Sob este paradigma, a política exterior do Brasil
orientou-se por um equívoco de substância, que Fernando Henrique
Cardoso expressou em artigo para a Revista Brasileira de Política
Internacional em 2001: uma tríplice mudança interna – democracia,
estabilidade monetária e abertura econômica eram seus novos


POLÍTICA EXTERIOR DE ARGENTINA, CHILE Y BRASIL: PERSPECTIVA COMPARADA


comandos. Como não se conhecem experiências em que estes
comandos tenham servido a Estados maduros como vetores de
política exterior, a idéia de mudança introduziu naturalmente o
paradigma do estado normal, como invenção da inteligência
periférica (Cervo, 2002:8).


Gracias al cambio del rumbo económico y la adopción de las
recetas neoliberales, desde el punto de vista de la inversión extranjera
directa, Brasil se vio beneficiado con un flujo altamente significativo.
A partir de la reformulación de la política cambiaria (enero de 1999),
la devaluación de la moneda y la apertura de la economía, el país pasó
a ser uno de los principales receptores de IED, recibiendo cerca de 30
mil millones de dólares ese año y una cifra cercana a 25 mil millones
de esa moneda en el año 2000.


Según Guilhon Albuquerque, desde el punto de vista comercial,
la actitud del país se tornó más positiva y propositiva. El Gatt y, por
extensión la OMC, dejó de ser evaluado como un instrumento de
apertura forzada de mercados en beneficio de los países industrializados,
pasando a ser visto como un instrumento de convergencia entre los
intereses distintos de países exportadores e importadores de las más
diversas dimensiones y capacidades económicas dispares (Guilhon
Albuquerque, 2000). Brasil aceptó las limitaciones que le impuso la
Ronda Uruguay y participó activamente de la OMC, a cambio de la
garantía que un sistema judicial de solución de controversias fuera
implementado. Los mecanismos de solución de controversias y la
agricultura fueron las prioridades de la diplomacia económica brasileña
en las negociaciones de la OMC. 10 No obstante, parece también factible
que la posición más “flexible” del Brasil frente a las exigencias de mayor
liberalización provenientes de las economías más desarrolladas fuera
coincidente con el giro hacia políticas neoliberales que caracterizarían
la agenda gubernamental de los años 90's. Desde finales de la década
anterior el país se había embarcado en la liberalización unilateral (Abreu,


10 Intervención del ministro Lampreia, en el seminario "O Brasil e o comércio internacional pós-
Cingapura" (marzo de 1997), citado por Kjeld Aagaard Jakobsen, O Que Esperar da Política
Externa Brasileira?, Carta Internacional, n° $94/95$, dezembro 2000/janeiro 2001; p. 10-12.


247


RAÚL BERNAL-MEZA


2001). De allí que, desde Montreal, Brasil comenzara a converger con
la tendencia dominante, especialmente en lo que se refería a “los nuevos
temas (TRIPS) y con la posición norteamericana en la liberalización
agrícola.


Fiel a su opción predominante por la dimensión comercial de la
política externa en su inserción internacional (Bernal-Meza, 2000), el
Brasil continuó promoviendo iniciativas en este campo, asumiendo
una posición intermediaria. Con todo, ese mayor activismo y
“compromiso internacional del Brasil, expresado en su multilateralismo
económico, no trajo los resultados esperados y este aspecto se constituyó
en uno de los puntos clave sobre los cuales se sustentaría la crítica a la
política externa de Cardoso.


La diplomacia brasileña había sido muy activa para evitar la
defección de Argentina y Chile, cuyos gobiernos se inclinaban hacia
Nafta y estuvieron predispuestos a anticipar la implantación de Alca
del 2005 para 2003.


Sin embargo, dos grandes fracasos deberían señalarse, respecto
de la  política latinoamericana”, en su relación a Estados Unidos, que
se vinculan al proyecto ALCSA: el acercamiento de México a la potencia
hemisférica  que le quitaba a Brasil el sostén de la otra “potencia
media" regional  y, posteriormente, el acuerdo de libre comercio
firmado por Chile con Estados Unidos. Como hemos señalado al
abordar las relaciones entre Chile y México – teniendo en vista la
posición respectiva del Brasil –a comienzos de los años de 1990 México
reformuló su patrón de relacionamiento externo con las grandes
potencias y, en especial con Estados Unidos.


El cambio respecto de Estados Unidos se relacionaba con la nueva
política económica de apertura (neoliberalismo), en sintonía con las
prescripciones del “Consenso de Washington”. La más importante
discrepancia entre México y Brasil ocurrió como consecuencia de la
adhesión de aquel país al North American Free Trade Agreement. En
la visión de la diplomacia brasileña este hecho rompía con la tradición
que, en tanto "potencias medias”, ambos países latinoamericanos habían
mantenido históricamente (en forma predominante), en el sentido de
mantener en el más bajo nivel posible la influencia de las grandes


248


POLÍTICA EXTERIOR DE ARGENTINA, CHILE Y BRASIL: PERSPECTIVA COMPARADA


potencias dentro del propio país y en la región, lo que hasta entonces
había sido una constante en los respectivos comportamientos externos.


Asimismo, la apertura formal de negociaciones bilaterales entre
Chile y Estados Unidos, a fines del 2000, revirtió abruptamente el
éxito que la diplomacia brasileña había tenido hasta entonces, en el
contexto del Cono Sur, de impedir negociaciones comerciales unilaterales
sobre Alca, por parte de alguno de los miembros (o asociados) del
Mercosur con Washington. La firma del Acuerdo de Libre Comercio
entre Chile y Estados Unidos, a inicios de diciembre de 2002, selló
el fracaso de la diplomacia brasileña en ese sentido. Estos mismos
elementos contribuían para hacer más evidente algunas incoherencias y
contradicciones de la política exterior de la administración de Cardoso.
Estos elementos explican que, revisando análisis recientes, 11 se advierte
que, como nunca antes, no hubo consenso interno sobre la política
exterior seguida por las dos gestiones de Cardoso (Bernal-Meza, 2002a).


Brasil enfrenta los primeros años del siglo XXI con un nuevo
gobierno. La plataforma de propuestas en materia de política exterior
anunciaba pocos pero importantes cambios, los cuales pueden llevar a
una modificación sustancial de la agenda internacional, los objetivos
externos y, por cierto al estilo diplomático del país.


Lo original y el liderazgo en la “nueva política exterior brasileña”
muestra que hay una renovada visión de la política exterior del iniciado
gobierno de Lula. Su disposición al liderazgo sudamericano tiene
propuestas innovadoras, progresistas y solidarias de cooperación con
los países del continente. Las mismas, de concretarse, provocarían un
vuelco fundamental en las relaciones intra y extra regionales.


11 Ver, por ejemplo, Amado Luiz Cervo. Dice este autor que bajo la presidencia de Cardoso
el pensamiento brasileño sería conducido al más avanzado estadio de adaptación a las
tendencias del orden internacional de los años noventa, abandonando los requisitos de
desarrollo interno mantenidos por la política exterior desde los años 30; aplicando una
apertura del mercado interno sin negociación, privatizaciones sin cuidar el reforzamiento de
la economía nacional, un sistema financiero puesto al servicio de la estabilización monetaria,
con lo cual el Brasil seguiría una senda de debilitamiento y fragilidad económico-financiera
igual que otros países que han aplicado la receta norteamericana. Cfr. Política de comércio
exterior e desenvolvimento: a experiência brasileira. Revista Brasileira de Política Internacional,
Brasília, ano 40, $n^{\circ}2$, 1997, p. 5-26.


249


RAÚL BERNAL-MEZA


Entre estas propuestas están:


la apertura del mercado brasileño a las exportaciones de productos
efectivamente producidos en los países vecinos, sin exigir
reciprocidad; la concesión de derechos políticos y sociales integrales
a los ciudadanos sudamericanos que residan en el Brasil, sin exigir
reciprocidad. Derivado de esta política, una cooperación económica,
política y militar entre los Estados de América del Sur fluiría con
facilidad y naturalidad (Pinheiro Guimarães, 2002:13).


Estas formulaciones, de llegar a efectivizarse, marcarían una clara
disposición a asumir un liderazgo con compromisos y que corresponden
a un país con aspiración a “potencia media”; pues, fue justamente esa
ausencia la que evidenció la gran contradicción de la política exterior
brasileña del período Cardoso. No se podía aspirar a una posición de
liderazgo  como “potencia regional” – sin pagar algunos costos (Bernal-
Meza, 1998).


Esta agenda, de “alta política” debería llevar, obligatoriamente, a
un cambio de sustancia en la inserción internacional del Brasil, explorando
ahora la dimensión política como la predominante de la misma.


Aún con todo, planteamos que existen límites para el disenso
internacional. En efecto, es evidente que los principales límites para el
“cambio de estilo de la diplomacia”, según lo definiera Celso Amorim
(lo que equivalía en realidad a una reformulación de la agenda de la
política exterior) están en la política interna y la vinculación con un
programa de gobierno que cumpla la política prometida. Como señaló
un comentario de prensa argentino,


250


Es ocioso decir que Lula enfrenta un horizonte idéntico: antes
de poder acometer los trabajos para los que fue elegido, debe aferrar
los diferenciados timones del Estado y de la sociedad, tarea no sencilla
y de inciertos resultados. Después  si es que hay un después
sabremos de quién se trata; hasta entonces no será sino un
'administrador', un 'referente', un 'político carismático', términos
actuales con que se alude pudorosamente a ese desnivel que los años
setenta se solazaban en descubrir entre gobierno y poder (...). No
cabe aquí la futurología. Lula hará lo que pueda y una de las


POLÍTICA EXTERIOR DE ARGENTINA, CHILE Y BRASIL: PERSPECTIVA COMPARADA


alternativas es que no haga nada de lo que ha propuesto – o que sus
seguidores presumen que ha propuesto –, o, peor todavía, que haga
más bien lo contrario, lo que en todo caso le valdrá, a su turno, unos
cuantos elogios por su condición de 'pragmático', formulados con
un dejo untuoso y perdonavidas (...). Brasil, que desde la época de
Getulio Vargas ha sido controlado por elites invariablemente
conservadoras y nacionalistas, adheridas a principios de gobierno
notablemente coherentes para los parámetros regionales. 12


3. POLÍTICA EXTERIOR CHILENA


Durante muchos años fue posible imaginar la política exterior
chilena como siguiendo parámetros históricamente establecidos,
sostenidos por el consenso político de los grupos de poder y de gobierno.
En realidad, existió una vinculación entre el carácter de la inserción
internacional del país y su política exterior. Históricamente, Chile ha
sido una economía “extrovertida” (Bernal-Meza, 1996). El país dedicó
en el pasado mucha atención a su política exterior tradicional,
específicamente la alta política de relaciones internacionales. Esta política,
que se basaba en el respeto al sistema jurídico internacional y en la
importancia de la unidad y cooperación política entre los países en
desarrollo como sus componentes fundamentales, promocionaba un
lugar dentro del sistema internacional que aseguraba a un país pequeño
los recursos “ideales de política y una defensa contra el “realismo” del
poder. El buen desempeño de esta política por parte de la diplomacia
chilena, cuyas raíces se fundamentan en el pensamiento de Diego
Portales y Andrés Bello, consagró una imagen diferenciada dentro del
mundo diplomático, mientras que la búsqueda de la universalización
de estos vínculos reportaba beneficios para el país.


Después del fracaso del “Estado conservador y del “Estado
liberal" en el siglo XIX, en cuanto a la construcción de un país
desarrollado; de la dilapidación de los recursos y beneficios obtenidos
en la Guerra del Pacífico, el Estado chileno llegó a su crisis, expresada
en la guerra civil de 1981, en la “crisis del salitre” (1916-1928) y en la


12 Fernando Sánchez Zinny, “El destino latinoamericano”, La Nación Line, 9 de febrero de 2003.


251


RAÚL BERNAL-MEZA


“crisis del 30”. A partir de entonces, la sociedad chilena optó por un
nuevo modelo de Estado y sociedad, el que fue instalado en 1938 y
que se mantuvo hasta 1973. Este modelo, similar a aquellos de la
misma época en Argentina y Brasil, se caracterizaría por el importante
papel del Estado en el desarrollo económico y social, con un fuerte rol
interventor y regulador y subsidiario de la economía de mercado; es
decir, un Estado empresario y desarrollista. Es también en ese período
que se fortalece la democracia y ésta se transforma en el sustento y la
imagen de una activa política exterior.


Con la llegada del régimen militar presidido por Augusto
Pinochet, en septiembre de 1973, la política exterior tradicional
desaparece rápidamente:


En forma paralela al golpe de Estado, en el ámbito de la
política internacional, no sólo se rompió el vínculo entre democracia
y política exterior, sino que en forma simultánea también se rompió
el principio de universalización de las relaciones diplomáticas. 13


Se produjo, entonces, el abandono de la alta política como eje
central de su diplomacia, que marcó un cambio muy significativo en
el rumbo de la política exterior chilena, aún cuando se incorporarían
dinámicas propias de la alta ideologización del régimen.


Es en este cambio donde se ve el origen del nuevo pragmatismo
en la política exterior chilena, que tiene su fundamento en la teoría
neo-liberal económica, que implica reformas estatales y oportunidades
económicas indefinidas. Por lo tanto, el nuevo enfoque de la diplomacia
chilena es la baja política, o dicho de otra forma, un énfasis más
profundo sobre los asuntos económicos y la apertura hacia los mercados
internacionales.


El grupo de poder constituido en torno de las Fuerzas Armadas
impuso la concepción de que la dinámica del crecimiento económico
chileno debía provenir del sector externo y esta concepción del desarrollo
se proyectó a los gobiernos democráticos que le siguieron. Esta visión


13 Francisco Rojas Aravena, Chile: cambio político e inserción internacional. 1964-1997,
Estudios Internacionales, (julio-diciembre 1997), nº 119-120: 388.


252


POLÍTICA EXTERIOR DE ARGENTINA, CHILE Y BRASIL: PERSPECTIVA COMPARADA


transformaría a la cancillería en una institución más diversificada, que
no solamente se preocupa por asuntos políticos, sino que asume un
rol fundamental en la expansión del comercio internacional. Este es el
sentido de la baja política, que jugó un rol central en el gobierno de
Pinochet y en los gobiernos democráticos que le han sucedido, con
respecto a la construcción de sus políticas exteriores. Sin embargo, este
pragmatismo no se confina sólo al cambio de su política exterior, sino
que también se encuentra en su desempeño, en parte diferenciado por
su performance económica, de otros modelos, dentro del esquema
neo-liberal. A pesar de su apertura unilateral y la insistencia en la
destrucción de barreras comerciales, Chile no liberalizó totalmente los
flujos de capitales, manteniendo primero una legislación que
resguardaba de los riesgos del capital financiero volátil, buscando que
la inversión extranjera directa permaneciera en el país y luego dejando
en manos del Banco Central herramientas de intervención. Tampoco
privatizó los dos sectores estratégicos más importantes para su desarrollo
económico (cobre y petróleo), que son, al mismo tiempo aquellos
que contribuyen con gran parte de las rentas del Estado.


Chile fue así el primer país latinoamericano que comenzó a aplicar,
a partir de 1974, el modelo de liberalización de mercados y de apertura
a la economía internacional (Muñoz, 1996), modelo cuya continuidad
sostiene su actual inserción internacional.


Los antecedentes y evolución contemporánea de la política
exterior revelan que hasta 1973 la política exterior chilena se caracterizó
por un considerable componente de “tradición”, cuya base de sustentación
lo constituyó el régimen político-constitucional democrático. Estado
de derecho y legalidad interna permitieron sostener una política exterior
con consenso interno y proyección histórica, cuyos principios, respeto
a los tratados, al derecho internacional y cumplimiento de los
compromisos asumidos, recibieron también la incorporación de
concepciones, valores e ideas provenientes de las plataformas político-
ideológicas de los partidos políticos y coaliciones de gobierno. Cada
una de sus etapas, desde el abandono progresivo del alineamiento con
Estados Unidos, característico del periodo 1946-1960, hasta la llegada
al gobierno de la Unidad Popular, bajo la presidencia de Salvador Allende


253


RAÚL BERNAL-MEZA


– que tiñó la política exterior con algunos principios importantes como
el "pluralismo ideológico – significaron sucesivos progresos en la
actuación internacional. Durante esa extensa etapa, la política exterior
se caracterizaría por una firme vocación multilateralista, comprometida
con la integración y la solidaridad latinoamericanas y una creciente
tendencia hacia la universalización de las relaciones diplomáticas.
A partir de los años ochenta, cuatro rasgos podrían caracterizar el
desempeño de la economía chilena, fuente sustentadora de la política
exterior: un considerable grado de apertura; un marcado dinamismo
en la búsqueda de acuerdos de liberalización comercial; un continuo
crecimiento en estabilidad macroeconómica y una impactante
performance (en términos de una economía periférica, por cierto) en
la captación de inversión extranjera directa (Bernal-Meza, 1996; 1997).
Estos rasgos predominan hasta el presente.


De este modo, la agenda internacional de la democracia se
propuso: 1) recomponer las relaciones internacionales y la imagen
externa del país; 2) aplicar un modelo de política exterior fundado en
el pragmatismo y la flexibilidad; 3) un especial énfasis hemisférico,
incluyendo en particular a los Estados Unidos; 4) continuidad de la
internacionalización de la economía chilena, a través de la profundización
de los flujos internacionales de comercio, inversiones y transferencia
de tecnología; 5) promover el interés por la integración en los nuevos
esquemas económicos entonces en tratativas (Nafta y Mercosur), con
una reorientación del enfoque integracionista en lo económico y lo
político, promoviendo fórmulas más pragmáticas de integración
regional, subregional y bilateral; 6) promover coincidencias con las
políticas de apertura de las economías nacionales de la región y, 7) a
partir de una percepción crítica sobre los modelos de desarrollo nacional
y de integración ensayados en el pasado por los países de América
Latina,14 mantener la visión acerca de que el motor de la economía
chilena era la demanda mundial, lo que conducía a una visión más
pragmática de la política internacional.


14 Lo que en la interpretación de Amado L. Cervo hizo coincidir el modelo desarrollista de
Estado con un tipo particular de política exterior, en los principales países de la región. Cfr.
Cervo (1994; 2000; 2001; 2002).


254


POLÍTICA EXTERIOR DE ARGENTINA, CHILE Y BRASIL: PERSPECTIVA COMPARADA


La preocupación central de la planificación de política exterior y
de la diplomacia chilenas con el retorno de la democracia (condicionada
por la institucionalidad heredada) fue recomponer las relaciones y la
imagen internacionales del país, seriamente afectadas por la política
interna (de violación sistemática de los derechos humanos) y externa
(cruzada ideológica) del régimen militar. 15 Así, el retorno de la
democracia implicó nuevos retos a la política exterior. No se trataba
sólo de recuperar el papel y la imagen del pasado democrático, sino
adaptar ésta a las nuevas realidades del nuevo orden internacional y a
los condicionamientos de una estrategia económica de apertura al
mercado mundial, heredada del modelo económico impuesto por el
régimen militar, pero ahora en el marco de una nueva institucionalidad
(Bernal-Meza, 1996).


Las características de la actual política exterior (1990-2003) están
dadas por la combinación de cuatro factores: 1) los determinantes del
modelo económico heredado y que los gobiernos de la Concertación
aceptaron mantener; 2) el pragmatismo político, para hacer externamente
lo que el nuevo sistema internacional de post-guerra fría y el nuevo
orden mundial de la economía política permiten; 3) las condicionalidades
del proceso político interno, la “transición democrática y la vigencia
de la Constitución autoritaria de 1980; 4) los valores que han tratado
de incorporar los partidos políticos que integran la alianza que ha
gobernado este período de transición, sostenidos por la propia tradición
de política exterior previa al golpe de Estado, la exaltación de la
democracia como sistema político, la participación y otros principios
doctrinarios vinculados con el pensamiento de los propios partidos
que integran la Concertación. 16


Los resultados de la política exterior, por su parte, muestran que
uno de los debates centrales que se plantearon con el retorno de la
democracia, en un contexto que coincidió con el fin de la guerra fría y
el proceso de transición hacia un nuevo orden mundial, se relacionó


15 Para una profundización de la política exterior chilena bajo el gobierno militar, cfr.
Muñoz, Heraldo (1986) y Bernal-Meza, Raúl (1989; 1989).


16 Coalición que gobierna Chile desde el retorno a la democracia, integrada por los partidos
Demócrata Cristiano, Radical, Socialista y PPD (también de tendencia socialista).


255


RAÚL BERNAL-MEZA


con la vigencia que ahora podían tener algunas categorías históricas
que habían sido muy importantes en la política exterior chilena. Algunas
de las continuidades históricas que la política exterior siguió
reivindicando como “políticas de Estado en términos un poco retóricos
ahora parecían tener poca aplicación real en el fondo, porque el
contexto global había modificado profundamente, según sus
formuladores, la vigencia de esas “verdades históricas”.


El problema del cambio se planteó entonces como un desafío:
mientras más cambiaba el mundo ¿la política exterior debía mantenerse,
con el mismo estilo diplomático y las mismas posiciones internacionales
del pasado? La respuesta fue el pragmatismo: una capacidad de prever
escenarios globales, regionales, subregionales y nacionales. Sin embargo,
la política exterior chilena es una política conservadora, que se mueve
y evoluciona lenta, mesurada y reservadamente. Nuevamente, los valores
democráticos cimentan la diplomacia chilena, orientándola hacia un
orden institucional amparado en el apego a la ley y la autoridad
impersonal, 17 en lo interno, y el respeto al derecho internacional en
sus relaciones con América Latina y el mundo.


Como política pública cuyo objetivo primordial es colaborar
en el desarrollo nacional, el destino de la política exterior fue definido
en los términos de servir instrumentalmente a la resolución del problema
del subdesarrollo y limitar la dependencia externa, cuestiones que le ha
impuesto, históricamente, la propia heterogeneidad estructural de la
sociedad y su economía. La solución fue vista entonces en la continuidad
del modelo de inserción internacional basado en la apertura: una
economía pequeña, cuyo comercio exterior le aporta hoy más del 50%
de su PIB. Tal como describió un analista y diplomático chileno, hay
un modelo económico-social que sostiene la política exterior: “la
política exterior proyecta valores y es, en buena medida, un reflejo de
la política interna” (van Klaveren, 2000:130).


El éxito de este tipo de inserción, sobre la base de un “estado
logístico" que pone al servicio de los negocios las herramientas y


17 Uno de los principios fundamentales impuestos por el estadista Diego Portales en el inicio
de la organización nacional e inscrito en la Constitución de 1833.


256


POLÍTICA EXTERIOR DE ARGENTINA, CHILE Y BRASIL: PERSPECTIVA COMPARADA


condiciones para un buen desempeño, se advierten en el posicionamiento
del país en el Ranking del Foro Económico Mundial (ranking de
competitividad de coyuntura y de largo plazo). Chile lidera la posición
de los países latinoamericanos, ocupando el puesto $31^{\circ}$, a corto plazo,
y el $20^{\circ}$, a largo plazo, poniéndose adelante, incluso, de otros países
europeos; mientras que, en el ranking de productividad a nivel
macroeconómico, el país se encuentra muy delante de Brasil (que ocupa
el lugar 33) y de Argentina (lugar 65). En tanto, en el ranking mundial
de libertad económica – aspecto esencial si hablamos de un modelo de
libre mercado abierto al mundo – también lidera la posición de América
Latina, ubicándose en el puesto $n^{\circ}$ 16 del conjunto.18


Considerando el objetivo de apertura, inserción comercial en
los escenarios más dinámicos de la economía mundial y la búsqueda
de acuerdos de libre comercio, debería identificarse la política exterior
como significativamente exitosa. Los recientes acuerdos comerciales
firmados con la Unión Europea, Corea del Sur y Estados Unidos, que
se agregan a la amplia lista de la agenda comercial latinoamericana,
señalan una excelente performance y, en este sentido pareciera ser el
más exitoso ejemplo en la región. De hecho, en lo que se refiere a la
política sudamericana, el haber conseguido incorporarse al Mercosur en
calidad de "asociado”, sin tener que adoptar el arancel externo común,
debe ser considerado un éxito de negociación diplomática.


Sin embargo, políticamente, la agenda sudamericana y del
Mercosur marcan un llamativo desequilibrio, negativo, respecto de la
búsqueda de profundización del universalismo de la política exterior.
Brasil, el principal actor sudamericano y del bloque del cono sur, es
casi irrelevante en la agenda internacional chilena. La aplicación exitosa
de un ALC con Argentina, acuerdo que lleva más de diez años, no
conduce necesariamente a una extensión de los vínculos económicos y
comerciales con el resto de los países miembros del Mercosur. A pesar
que los presidentes chilenos del período aquí analizado han manifestado
permanentemente la “vocación latinoamericanista de la política exterior
chilena y han participado activamente de todos los encuentros regionales


18 Fuente: Diario La Nación, Buenos Aires, 13 de noviembre de 2002; sección Económica, p. 13.


257


RAÚL BERNAL-MEZA


y subregionales (Grupo de Río; cumbres del Mercosur), así como de
los interregionales (“Cumbres Iberoamericanas” y encuentros Unión-
Europea-América Latina), en la mayoría de los países – y, en particular
en Brasil – existe la percepción de que Chile no muestra mayor interés
en profundizar sus vínculos con el resto de naciones del Cono Sur. La
reciente elección del país como miembro del Consejo de Seguridad de
las Naciones Unidas por los próximos dos años, dio la oportunidad al
presidente Lagos para proponer ese sillón como “voz del Mercosur”,
propuesta que no tuvo ningún eco en las cancillerías del bloque, cuestión
que pone en evidencia ese distanciamiento. Paralelamente, no puede
dejar de señalarse el hecho que, al mismo tiempo que Chile se acercó a
México, este país y Brasil tienen entre sí escasos intereses comunes. 19
Las diferencias entre estas dos “potencias medias comenzaron a
profundizarse a partir del momento en que México reformuló su patrón
de relacionamiento externo con las grandes potencias, a partir de los
años noventa, en especial con Estados Unidos. La gran discrepancia
ocurrió cuando México propuso y luego se adhirió al North American
Free Trade Agreement, hecho que en la visión de la diplomacia brasileña
rompía con la tradición de ambas potencias medias de mantener en el
más bajo nivel posible la influencia de las grandes potencias dentro del
propio país y en la región, lo que hasta entonces había sido una constante
en los respectivos comportamientos externos (Sennes, 1998). La
posición de Chile y sus relaciones con Brasil, por tanto, deben ser
puestas contra este telón de fondo, a partir de la firma del TLC entre
Santiago y Washington.


19 Peter Hakim (Presidente del "Inter-American Dialogue'), por ejemplo, ha señalado que
México y Brasil han querido alcanzar importantes roles internacionales de formas totalmente
distintas, el primero atrelou o seu futuro aos Estados Unidos e abriu a economia quase que
totalmente ao comércio e investimento estrangeiros, el segundo sendo uma economia relativamente
fechada, almeja um papel de liderança independente na América do Sul e é visto pelos Estados
Unidos como oponente em determinados asuntos (...). La principal prioridad de la política
exterior mexicana continua a ser uma sólida parceria com os Estados Unidos (...). O Brasil, ao
contrário, conduz uma política externa muito mais autônoma e diversificada, cfr. Peter Hakim,
Brasil e México: duas maneiras de ser global, Política Externa, São Paulo, Paz e Terra/USP,
v. 10, $n^{\circ}$ 4, março, abril-maio 2002,  . 94-107.


258


POLÍTICA EXTERIOR DE ARGENTINA, CHILE Y BRASIL: PERSPECTIVA COMPARADA


Debe señalarse así que el anuncio de la apertura formal de
negociaciones bilaterales entre Chile y Estados Unidos, a fines del 2000,
revirtió abruptamente el éxito que la diplomacia brasileña había tenido
hasta entonces, de impedir negociaciones unilaterales por parte de alguno
de los miembros (o asociados) del Mercosur con Washington. En este
contexto, teniendo en cuenta las escasas coincidencias políticas entre
México y Brasil, la posición de Chile para con éste no podría dejar de
ser percibida, al menos, como de “rival”.


Más tarde, iniciado el año 2003, Chile y México sorprenderían
adoptando una posición común y haciendo una propuesta conjunta
en el seno del Consejo de Seguridad de la ONU, dirigida a las  grandes
potencias con derecho a veto para que revisaran sus posiciones y
asumieran sus responsabilidades, asignadas por la calidad de miembros
permanentes que la Carta de la ONU les asignaba.


Este era un nuevo elemento de la “política latinoamericana de
Chile, la cual ponía en evidencia ese acercamiento en el eje “norte-sur”
de la región, lo cual dejaba la relación Chile-Brasil en las características
que mantuvo durante gran parte de los noventa, pero donde las
innovaciones discurrían por otras agendas bilaterales. En definitiva, la
política “sudamericana de Chile, en particular con algunos de sus
principales actores nacionales, evidencia un déficit y, al mismo tiempo,
marca un desafío para la futura orientación de la política exterior.


En síntesis, la política exterior del período ha sido más bien
conservadora y pragmática; más expresión de un Estado comercialista
que ejemplo de su anterior tradición de activismo. Obviamente en
este cambio influyeron tanto las condiciones heredadas del modelo
económico que sigue sosteniendo la política exterior y la necesaria
revisión de algunas categorías históricas que fueron muy importantes
en el pasado, pero que a la luz del pragmatismo económico, ante el
proceso de transición y cambio de la economía y la política mundiales
habrían perdido cierta vigencia. El realismo pragmático frente a Estados
Unidos, traducido en el pasado en extensos períodos de “alineamiento”
(1946-1962) ha coincidido ahora con la aceptación interna de un
modelo de desarrollo asociado, que se expresa en la firma del Tratado
de Libre Comercio.


259


RAÚL BERNAL-MEZA


Sin embargo, en la medida que se reformulen algunas políticas
públicas vinculadas con el desarrollo, con el fin de mejorar los índices
altamente negativos en términos de distribución de la riqueza, la
erradicación de la pobreza, el crecimiento del empleo y otras, la política
exterior deberá readecuarse. Los documentos de la OECD referidos al
comportamiento económico de algunos países en desarrollo, resaltaron
la alta competitividad chilena, pero, al mismo tiempo, llamaron la
atención sobre el atraso científico y tecnológico del país. 20 Esta cuestión,
de persistir, se transformará en un futuro cercano en el límite estructural
del modelo de apertura en los términos actualmente planteados, lo
que debería llevar a la política exterior al retorno de una agenda más
política, vinculada con los problemas y reclamos del resto del mundo
en desarrollo. Para ello, la revisión del regionalismo, las alianzas en
términos de la agenda internacional con el fin de impulsar acuerdos
internacionales en beneficio de las economías atrasadas y la búsqueda
de acuerdos de cooperación científica y tecnológica, con estrategias de
asociación entre pares, deberían llevar también a una reformulación de
la agenda internacional de la política exterior chilena.


El rumbo futuro de la política exterior fue señalado en términos
precisos por el presidente Ricardo Lagos: “Mi deber como presidente
es trabajar para que Chile entre al mundo global aprovechando al
máximo las oportunidades que se nos ofrecen, disminuir los riesgos y
cuidar que los beneficios de esa globalización se distribuyan
equitativamente entre todas las familias. Chile es un país pequeño y
lejano. Siempre lo ha sido. Pero ni la lejanía nos debe empujar al
aislamiento, ni lo pequeño de nuestro mercado hacia el proteccionismo.
Mi gobierno no está disponible para políticas aislacionistas ni
proteccionistas, no importa las presiones que debamos enfrentar”.21


De estas definiciones se derivarán las relaciones exteriores
bilaterales, regionales y multilaterales de Chile en los próximos años.


20 Discurso de la Ministro de Relaciones Exteriores de Chile en la inauguración del año
académico de la Academia Diplomática de Chile; Santiago, 4 de abril de 2002.
21 Discurso del presidente de la República de Chile, Don Ricardo Lagos Escobar, en su
Mensaje Anual a la Nación; Santiago, 21 de mayo de 2002.


260


POLÍTICA EXTERIOR DE ARGENTINA, CHILE Y BRASIL: PERSPECTIVA COMPARADA


4. ASPECTOS COMPARATIVOS DE LAS POLITICAS EXTERIORES


En la aplicación de los enfoques teórico-metodológicos para el
estudio de la política exterior, durante los años 80 y 90 se advirtió que
había determinantes internos y externos de las políticas exteriores que
condicionaban no sólo los objetivos internacionales de las políticas,
sino también la materialización de las mismas una vez decidido el curso
de acción.


Respecto de las perspectivas centradas en factores internos, van
Klaveren sostuvo que resultaba difícil clasificar las perspectivas que se
centraban en estos factores, por la sencilla razón de que tendían a
confundirse entre sí; a pesar de lo cual él identificó cuatro; una de ellas
era la perspectiva centrada en la orientación del régimen. En ella se
intentaba identificar las características estructurales y orientaciones
básicas de una sociedad, tanto en lo político como en lo económico,
para evaluar su relevancia en el proceso de toma de decisiones. Esta
perspectiva ha dado lugar a tres variables generales de interés. La primera
se concentra en la forma de organización política y su impacto sobre la
política exterior; estableciendo diferencias entre regímenes democráticos
y regímenes autoritarios, al comparar al mismo país bajo diferentes
regímenes políticos (ejemplo, Chile). La segunda variable que señaló,
en relación con la orientación del régimen, se refería a la estrategia de
desarrollo adoptada por un país, variable que, según van Klaveren, ha
tenido - tradicionalmente una directa incidencia en el campo de la
política exterior.


De acuerdo con esta visión, la política externa no sólo es
evaluada en términos de su contribución a la obtención de metas
económicas tradicionales tales como la promoción del comercio, la
búsqueda de asistencia financiera en condiciones más positivas, etc.,
sino también como un medio para modificar variables internacionales
en un sentido más favorable a los objetivos de la estrategia de desarrollo
(van Klaveren, 1984:37).


Brasil y México serían un buen ejemplo. En tanto, la tercera
variable de orientación del régimen “se refiere a la existencia de un


261


RAÚL BERNAL-MEZA


estilo, e incluso, de un enfoque característico de política exterior en un
país, que proviene de una cierta tradición histórica que ha permeado
todo el comportamiento externo” (van Klaveren, 1984:38).


No obstante, agregaba el autor, las alusiones a políticas
"tradicionales que hacen ciertos países latinoamericanos eran más bien
retóricas, puesto que en esos “sagrados principios de sus diplomacias
ha habido muchas rupturas con el pasado y las innovaciones parecen
mucho más frecuentes.


Este es, entonces, el primer enfoque que utilizaremos para
comparar las tres políticas exterior. Se explica porque los tres países
pasaron de modelos autoritarios, con regímenes militares de derecha,
coincidentes en los 70s. y 80s., a regímenes democráticos de transición
(Argentina a fines de 1983; Brasil a mediados de 1985 y Chile a fines
de 1989).


Lo sorprendente al aplicar el enfoque es que la variable “tipo de
régimen no permite explicar los grandes cambios producidos en las
respectivas políticas exteriores, en los períodos analizados.


En el caso de la Argentina, los grandes paradigmas que fundaron
modelos de política exterior, como la “Tercera Posición” (1946-1955
y su aggiornamiento, la “Autonomía Heterodoxa”, 1973-1975) y el
“Realismo Periférico” (1989-2003), constituyeron diseños y hojas de
ruta para la política exterior en tiempos de democracia. Pero, entre
ellos, hubo tan grandes diferencias como entre la política exterior seguida
por el régimen autoritario militar (1976-1983) y la política exterior
seguida por el gobierno constitucional siguiente, de Raúl Alfonsín.


Desde el punto de vista de las estrategias nacionales de
desarrollo, 22 los tres países rompieron con sus respectivos pasados
desarrollistas autonómicos de inserción internacional y adoptaron el
modelo neoliberal, aún cuando en el caso chileno este cambio se produjo
con anterioridad al período histórico aquí analizado (es decir, bajo el
régimen militar 1973-1989). Tanto Brasil como Argentina vivieron
profundos cambios en las características de su inserción internacional,


22 Es decir, el modelo de desarrollo del que se derivan las características de la inserción en la
División Internacional del Trabajo.


262


POLÍTICA EXTERIOR DE ARGENTINA, CHILE Y BRASIL: PERSPECTIVA COMPARADA


durante el período analizado, modificando sustancialmente sus
respectivas políticas exteriores, si bien en el segundo caso los cambios
fueron mucho más drásticos y permanentes. Las respectivas políticas
exteriores vieron modificadas sus agendas, objetivos y estilos
diplomáticos; cambios que ocurrieron en un período de regímenes
políticos democráticos. En el caso chileno, el período democrático,
luego del régimen dictatorial de Pinochet, se ha caracterizado por la
continuidad.


Como se podrá apreciar, en este punto no habría coincidencias
entre coincidencias, rupturas y régimen político. En el caso de Argentina,
la ruptura había comenzado antes, bajo el régimen militar (1976-1983),
pero se profundizó radicalmente bajos los gobiernos democráticos de
Menem y los que le sucedieron, 23 mientras que en Brasil fue un régimen
democrático el que inició la ruptura (Collor) y otro similar la profundizó
(Cardoso). En tanto, en el caso de Chile, la ruptura llevada a cabo bajo
el régimen militar fue mantenida
en tanto modelo de inserción
internacional  por los gobiernos democráticos de la Concertación
(1990-2003).


Los tres países representan modelos distintos de política exterior,
pero todos han respondido más a cuestiones de índole interna
coaliciones, alianzas de gobierno; concepciones sobre las estrategias
posibles de desarrollo nacional; antecedentes históricos y estructura
del patrón de inserción económico internacional – que a factores
externos, vinculados éstos a acontecimientos que se produjeran fuera
de la región. Sin embargo, no puede desatenderse la importancia que
los cambios mundiales tuvieron sobre la formulación y praxis de las
respectivas políticas exteriores.


Nuestra conclusión al analizar comparativamente las políticas
exteriores de Brasil y Argentina, refleja que durante las administraciones
de Cardoso y Menem, respectivamente, se evidenció en la política
exterior un conflicto entre la calidad de la decisión y su viabilidad
(Bernal-Meza, 2000:417), cuestión que se repetiría en el caso
argentino, durante la actual gestión del presidente Duhalde.


23 Cfr. Raúl Bernal-Meza (2001; 2002a).


263


RAÚL BERNAL-MEZA


Comparativamente, la política exterior chilena resultó, en este sentido,
mucho más coherente, en la medida que las decisiones y la
operacionalidad de los temas incorporados a la agenda (o previamente
existentes) resultaron de efectiva aplicabilidad y de resultados adecuados
a sus objetivos.


El "giro a la derecha que implicó el abandono del modelo
rrollista-autonómico implicó en la argentina un cambio en las alianzas
externas, el inicio de un nuevo período de alineamiento con los Estados
Unidos y su integración como “Aliado Preferencial extra-Otan ;
mientras, en Brasil el mismo se reflejó en la adscripción y participación
activa en organismos y regímenes internacionales antes vistos
críticamente (Consejo de Seguridad de la ONU; Gatt-OMC), que
sólo unos años se habían considerado “contrarios a los intereses y
objetivos de la política de país intermediario, grupo en el cual se
autoinscribía Brasil, bajo la aspiración de un reconocimiento
internacional como potencia regional.


Los tres países buscaron durante el período (en el caso del Brasil
con la excepción del gobierno de Itamar Franco) transformarse en un
socio preferencial de Estados Unidos. Con todo, puede señalarse que
Brasil fue el único país sudamericano que, de alguna forma, resistió a
todas las iniciativas de los Estados Unidos en la región.


Por su parte Chile, durante el mismo período, bajo un régimen
político democrático, vivió una significativa continuidad en la
formulación y praxis de la política exterior. Hubo gran continuidad de
la agenda, de los objetivos y del estilo de la misma. En este caso, las
rupturas, cambios y modificaciones que pueden advertirse, desde el
punto de vista histórico (incluyendo también continuidades) lo son
respecto del período bajo un régimen político autoritario.


Estas constataciones permiten afirmar que no ha habido relación
entre el régimen político y los cambios de política exterior; un hecho
de la realidad, que señala la inexistencia de una vinculación entre
régimen político y política exterior para la comprensión de cambios
tan radicales y contrapuestos en sus fundamentos y praxis.


En el caso argentino, paradojalmente, los gobiernos constitucionales
del pasado anterior a Menem, moderaron su vocación “independentista”,


264


POLÍTICA EXTERIOR DE ARGENTINA, CHILE Y BRASIL: PERSPECTIVA COMPARADA


mientras los gobiernos de facto morigeraron su vocación por el
 alineamiento”, tradición que se rompería gracias al impacto del
paradigma construido por la comunidad epistémica del menemismo,
constituyendo éste así la gran excepción.


Creo que el eje que explica continuidades, cambios y rupturas
en las respectivas políticas exteriores y permite evaluar comparativamente
los tres ejemplos está, más que en la relación entre régimen político y
política exterior, en la relación entre ésta y el modelo de desarrollo, la
opción por una determinada estrategia económica y su respectiva
inserción internacional.


En el caso argentino, se advierte que la imposición del modelo
neoliberal, de apertura y desregulación, no asociado a una estrategia
coincidente en términos del fortalecimiento de áreas y sectores que
apoyaran dicha inserción externa, fue coincidente con lo que Cervo
denominó como “Estado normal y su política exterior fue entonces
acorde con ella.


En el caso brasileño, las inconsistencias y debilidades de la política
exterior durante el período, están en relación con la propia indefinición
de un modelo nacional de desarrollo del cual derivara la formulación
de agendas y objetivos de la política exterior. Mientras, en el caso de
Chile, la continuidad de su política exterior está en relación con la
permanencia en el tiempo de un modelo económico de apertura al
mundo, en el cual la política externa y su diplomacia juegan la carta
correspondiente a la función de un “Estado logístico”.


Aún cuando el grado de internacionalización e integración al
mercado mundial es muy distinto en cada uno de estos tres países y la
participación del comercio exterior en la composición del PIB es
significativamente distinto en cada uno de ellos (9% en el caso brasileño;
cerca del 11% actualmente para la Argentina y más cerca del 60% para
el caso chileno), existe una lógica que mueve el accionar de las políticas
exteriores y que está relacionado estrechamente con las características
del modelo nacional de desarrollo y sus respectivas políticas económico-
comerciales.


En términos bilaterales, luego de la destitución del presidente
Collor comenzaron a evidenciarse las diferencias en política exterior


265


RAÚL BERNAL-MEZA


entre Argentina y Brasil, ambos bajo gobiernos democráticos que se
centraron en cinco grandes núcleos: 1- las interpretaciones sobre el
“orden mundial emergente o en transición” y sobre la “globalización”;
2- el papel que cada uno de estos países aspiraba a jugar en esos
contextos; 3- los paradigmas dominantes sobre política externa; 4- las
relaciones con Estados Unidos; 5- las políticas de seguridad.


A partir de la implementación del Plan de Convertibilidad de la
moneda argentina (1992) y del estrechamiento de las relaciones de este
país con Estados Unidos (alianza extra-Otan), Argentina y Brasil
profundizaron sus desencuentros, los que terminarían concentrándose
en estos dos temas, que serían considerados sistemáticamente por Brasilia
como los factores que impedirían profundizar la integración económica
en el Mercosur y la cooperación política.


En el caso de las relaciones entre Brasil y Chile, tal como
señalamos al analizar la política exterior chilena, el anuncio de la apertura
formal de negociaciones bilaterales entre Chile y Estados Unidos, a
fines del 2000, revirtió abruptamente el éxito que la diplomacia
brasileña había tenido hasta entonces, de impedir negociaciones
unilaterales por parte de alguno de los miembros (o asociados) del
Mercosur con Washington. En este contexto, teniendo en cuenta las
escasas coincidencias políticas entre México y Brasil, la posición de
Chile para con éste no podría dejar de ser percibida, al menos, como
de “rival”. Como señaló Peter Hakim, las políticas exteriores de México
y Brasil fueron bastante diferentes en su forma de inserción
internacional, en su relación vis-à-vislos Estados Unidos y en la forma
de ser percibidos por éste (Hakim, 2002).


Si bien se podría demostrar la existencia de un conjunto más
amplio de diferencias24 que de sintonías, señalaremos las que nos
parecen las cuestiones más relevantes. En primer lugar, se advierte que
ha habido una reformulación o actualización de los marcos conceptuales
de las políticas exteriores más evidente en el caso argentino que en el


24 Un primer abordaje de estas cuestiones puede verse en R. Bernal-Meza (1998ª). Para una
visión más actual y de la cual hemos extraído elementos comparativos sobre los que nos
apoyamos, ver, José Augusto Guilhon Albuquerque, "A nova geometria de poder mundial
nas visões argentina e brasileira", São Paulo, USP-NUPRI, paper, 1999.


266


POLÍTICA EXTERIOR DE ARGENTINA, CHILE Y BRASIL: PERSPECTIVA COMPARADA


brasileño y el chileno. Si bien en los dos primeros países se percibió la
necesidad de adoptar un nuevo patrón de desarrollo, la adecuación o el
cambio de los marcos conceptuales de la política exterior, para que
coincidieran con los esfuerzos de reinserción y las tendencias “globales”,
ha sido más profundo en Argentina que en Brasil.


A) ASPECTOS COMPARATIVOS


Tanto Argentina como Brasil llevaron adelante, durante los años
90, una política interna similar: marcada por el neoliberalismo. Esto
se reflejaría en la política exterior con la adscripción al paradigma
fundamentalista  ideológico de la globalización.25 Optaron por una
inserción periférica al orden de la globalización post guerra fría y sufrieron
un acelerado proceso de desnacionalización de sus respectivas industrias
y servicios, una globalización de sus finanzas (gran exposición y
fragilidad a los flujos externos volátiles de capital) y un gran
endeudamiento. La política exterior se adaptó: en el caso de Argentina,
conduciéndola a la búsqueda de una alianza subordinada y dependiente
con Estados Unidos; en el caso brasileño, reduciendo sus aspiraciones
“globalistas”. Esto se tradujo en que las percepciones y conflictos por
espacios de inserción y liderazgo se trasladaran desde el ámbito del
sistema internacional al subsistema del Cono Sur (y del Mercosur).


Varias de las decisiones y la operacionalidad de los temas
incorporados por las respectivas agendas (o existentes con anterioridad,
como el caso de la aspiración al reconocimiento internacional como
“potencia media”, en el caso del Brasil), resultaron al final del período
inviables. No así en el caso chileno.


Brasil cedió terreno en su objetivo de construir un bloque
subregional o regional que lo tuviera como su centro o núcleo estratégico;
tampoco alcanzó su objetivo de conseguir de Estados Unidos un perfil
de relacionamiento de potencia y no logró su reconocimiento mundial
(es decir, por los grandes poderes) como “potencia media”. Argentina,
por su parte, fracasó en su política de “reinserción al primer mundo y,


25 En el sentido que ahora era ésta la que imponía los límites y condiciones de la inserción
internacional.


267


RAÚL BERNAL-MEZA


a pesar de haber alcanzado su objetivo de mínima – aliado extra Otan
 , puesto que el de máxima era su integración plena, en medio de su
crisis estructural y en default, fue dejada caer por su principal aliado
externo. En cambio, Chile alcanzó su objetivo de asociarse comercialmente
a Estados Unidos, aún cuando debió ceder en algunas posiciones.


Desde el punto de vista de la existencia de articulaciones
conceptuales específicas, en el eje o continuum autonomía-desarrollo,
en el caso argentino hay una aceptación e incorporación de las ideas
pro-mercado y primer-mundistas (orden mundial; globalización) y en
el caso brasileño, un mayor continuum de ideas más desarrollistas y
autonomistas.


En términos del continuum “continuidad-ruptura en las
orientaciones de la política externa, pocas veces se han visto cambios
tan bruscos en un período tan corto de tiempo, como en el caso argentino
(entre 1984-1989 y 1989-2003),26 mientras que, en el caso brasileño
se advierten más tendencias a un statu quo de las orientaciones básicas
ya identificadas desde mediados de los años  70s. Por su parte, en el
caso de Chile, las orientaciones de la política exterior han sido de una
significativa continuidad.


Así, una primera cuestión surge con evidencia: la política exterior
argentina de los años 90 ha sido más receptiva al discurso y los
argumentos occidentalistas y liberales, mientras que la política externa
brasileña ha mantenido una mayor permanencia en la tradición de
sensibilidad a los conceptos y visiones desarrollistas y del paradigma
norte-sur. En el caso chileno, allí se optó por el  pragmatismo” y el “bajo
perfil".


Ha habido una vinculación más estrecha entre reformas
económicas y cambios conceptuales (ideas) en la política exterior en el
caso argentino que en el caso brasileño. Desde el punto de vista del
“estilo con el que cada país ha buscado realizar los objetivos e intereses
de su agenda internacional, las estrategias han sido muy distintas: En el
caso argentino, la hipótesis es que la rápida adhesión a los regímenes


26 Consideramos aquí el año 2003 al momento de finalizar este documento preliminar:
febrero de ese año.


268


POLÍTICA EXTERIOR DE ARGENTINA, CHILE Y BRASIL: PERSPECTIVA COMPARADA


propuestos por el mundo desarrollado era la condición previa para
obtener beneficios concretos, en términos de préstamos, inversiones,
etc.) y, por lo tanto, ese camino era la condición básica para el crecimiento
económico. En cambio, en el caso del Brasil, la hipótesis ha sido más
bien la de la preservación de espacios de autonomía, es decir, la necesidad
de negociar los términos de ingreso a esos regímenes internacionales,
entendiendo que esa autonomía maximizaba, en el largo plazo, las
posibilidades de obtener esos mismos beneficios.


Sin embargo, la paradoja es que mientras Brasil ha buscado (o
aspirado, al menos) un reconocimiento internacional como potencia
media – en tanto objetivo definido, de Franco a Cardoso – y declara
aspirar al liderazgo en el cono sur, cuestiones todas de alta política, ha
privilegiado permanentemente la dimensión comercial como la forma
de inserción internacional; mientras que la Argentina, que declaró, bajo
Menem, De la Rúa y Duhalde su opción por el paradigma "trading
state”, formulando a su vez su propio paradigma ciudadano-céntrico,27
cuestiones que remiten a una lectura más bien de baja política, ha
privilegiado la "dimensión política” en la inserción internacional (alianza
con Estados Unidos y la Otan; política de seguridad; conflicto con
Brasil por el tema de la representación en el Consejo de Seguridad de
la ONU, etc.).


B) AGENDAS


Los cambios en las agendas y los objetivos, de las políticas
exteriores de los tres países están marcados esencialmente por las macro-
cosmovisiones de las alianzas gobernantes (que incluyen a los respectivos
presidentes y sus decision makers). Para Argentina y Chile, entre 1989
y 2003, el actor externo más relevante de la política exterior ha sido
Estados Unidos, lo que marca una profunda diferencia con la agenda y
los objetivos de la política exterior brasileña, a pesar de las “incoherencias”
y “ambivalencias del período de Cardoso.


27 Para la fundamentación de la construcción del paradigma, desde la perspectiva de su
formulador argentino, ver, Carlos Escudé (1992; 1995). Para nuestra interpretación, Raúl
Bernal-Meza (1994; 1999).


269


RAÚL BERNAL-MEZA


C) SEGURIDAD INTERNACIONAL Y SEGURIDAD REGIONAL


A pesar de algunas diferencias en las formas de acceder a los
nuevos marcos regulatorios del orden mundial (por ejemplo, aceptando
la hegemonía de la OTAN e integrándose a ella, como es el caso
argentino), las políticas exterior de los tres países coincidieron
sólidamente en el apoyo a los regímenes de no proliferación y de
prohibición de armas de destrucción masiva; avanzando también en el
plano regional en medidas de confianza mutua con sus vecinos.


DIPLOMACIA ECONÓMICA


Tanto Brasil como Chile se caracterizaron por un fuerte
contenido de "diplomacia económica en la política exterior. La agenda
económica fue sustancialmente más relevante que la agenda política.
Sin embargo, las diferencias aparecen al evaluar el papel que a cada una
de ellas se le asignaba en los objetivos de la política exterior.


CONSENSOS INTERNOS


El país que menos refleja divergencias internas (nos referimos a
la sociedad “informada”: principalmente la academia; también la prensa
y las dirigencias políticas), en materia de política exterior, es Chile. Sin
embargo, habría que evaluar el impacto que tuvo sobre la “academia”
el paso de muchos especialistas desde este sector a funciones diplomáticas
y burocráticas. Los gobiernos de la “Concertación” hicieron de la política
exterior chilena la política de un Estado comercial. Eso explica la ausencia
de formulaciones novedosas y originales, puesto que la academia,
predominantemente, acompañó esa gestión de gobierno.


De la lectura de la literatura sobre política exterior hecha por
nacionales (autores brasileños) 28 se concluye que el Brasil no se
caracterizó por una política exterior de grandes controversias internas,
respecto de la relación del país con el mundo. Hay que adentrarse a
fines del siglo XX, bajo el gobierno de Cardoso, para advertir, por


28 Cfr. Cervo; Cervo y Bueno; Almeida; Guilhon Albuquerque;


270


POLÍTICA EXTERIOR DE ARGENTINA, CHILE Y BRASIL: PERSPECTIVA COMPARADA


primera vez, el surgimiento de una visión profundamente crítica sobre
la política exterior. En parte, el cuestionamiento interno a la política
externa se fue profundizando a medida que la negociación de acuerdos
internacionales, con Estados Unidos (Alca) y la Unión Europea (vía
Mercosur), se transformó en un debate interno de política, entre sectores
 y lobbies favorables a la apertura (importadores) y los contrarios (los
import-competing). Desde categorías tradicionalmente realistas, algunos
autores señalan que el gran problema fue que el debate sistemático y
abarcativo sobre el "interés nacional brasileño" fue virtualmente olvidado
en los últimos años, porque la sociedad fue absorbida por los temas
prioritarios de la agenda doméstica, relegando a segundo plano las
cuestiones cruciales del área externa (Magnoli, César & Yang, 2000:34).


Pero el síntoma más significativo de las profundas diferencias
sobre la política exterior de Cardoso se dio en el seno mismo de Itamaraty,
situación que culminó con la destitución del embajador Samuel Pinheiro
Guimarães de su cargo de Director del Instituto Brasileiro de Relações
Internacionais del Ministerio de Relações Exteriores, luego de la difusión
de un extenso artículo de su autoría donde cuestionaba abiertamente
la política seguida por la administración de Cardoso frente a Alca y a
Estados Unidos. 29


Por último, en el caso argentino, la política exterior ha sido
casi históricamente  expresión de profundos debates y disensos
internos, que también se advirtieron en los tres gobiernos de ese país
analizados en el período.


Sin embargo, la presencia de esos disensos y controversias internas,
identificables en los casos argentino y brasileño, no tuvieron el peso
suficiente como para modificar el rumbo de la política exterior. Este
hecho muestra que el “presidencialismo”, más que el sistema político en
tanto régimen de gobierno, es el que tiene, en estos países, una mayor
relación con la definición (formulación y praxis) de las respectivas
políticas exteriores.


29 Cfr. Raúl Bernal-Meza (2002), Os dez anos do Mercosul e a crise argentina. Política
Externa.


271


RAÚL BERNAL-MEZA


A MODO DE REFLEXIÓN FINAL


Tradicionalmente los análisis sobre política exterior
latinoamericana señalaron a los cambios drásticos de los sistemas
políticos (democracia versus autoritarismo) como fuente sustentadora
y explicativa de los profundos cambios en los contenidos, agendas y
praxis, de las respectivas políticas exteriores. La paradoja que expresan
los tres casos aquí analizados consiste en que los cambios y las
continuidades advertidas no se relacionan esencialmente con las
sustituciones o cambios del régimen político, sino que responden,
esencialmente a las modificaciones sustanciales de los modelos
nacionales de desarrollo e inserción internacional. Los paradigmas,
modelos de política externa o ésta como expresión de un “modelo de
Estado fueron diseñados e impulsados por la conducción de las alianzas
internas de poder que, en el período analizado, abrazaron – sin hesitar
- la ideología del neoliberalismo. Así, las políticas exteriores estuvieron
en la línea de las tendencias marcadas por las lógicas hegemónicas, que
despojaron a éstas de sus anteriores contenidos y las alinearon con los
contenidos de los denominados “consensos” – tal el de Washington–,
bajo la dominación de los “valores hegemónicos universalmente
aceptados".


BIBLIOGRAFÍA CITADA:


Almeida, Roberto Paulo de. Relações Internacionais e Política Externa
do Brasil, Porto Alegre, Editora da Universidade/UFRGS, 1998.
Baumann, Renato. Mercosul: Origens, Ganhos, Desencontros e
Perspectivas. In: Baumann, Renato (organizador), Mercosul.
Avanços e Desafios da Integração, Brasília: Ipea/Cepal; 2001,
p. 19-68.


Bernal-Meza, Raúl. Teorías, ideas políticas y percepciones en la
formulación de la política exterior chilena: 1945-1987. In:
R. Bernal-Meza, J. C. Puig, L. Tomassini, et. al., Teorías de
Relaciones Internacionales y de Derecho Internacional en América


272


POLÍTICA EXTERIOR DE ARGENTINA, CHILE Y BRASIL: PERSPECTIVA COMPARADA


Latina, Caracas: Instituto de Altos Estudios de América Latina/
Universidad Simon Bolívar /O.E.A.; p. 149-270.


<sel. y comp..>, Política, Integración y comercio internacional
en el Cono Sur Latinoamericano, Mendoza, Universidad Nacional
de Cuyo-Facultad de Ciencias Políticas y Sociales/Centro de
Estudios de las Relaciones Internacionales de América Latina
(CERIAL), 1989a.


América Latina en la Economía Política Mundial, Buenos Aires:
Grupo Editor Latinoamericano, 1994


La Globalización: ¿Un proceso y una ideología? In: Realidad
Económica, Buenos Aires, Instituto Argentino para el Desarrollo
Económico, IADE, $n^{\circ}$ 139, abril-mayo de 1996; p. 83-99.


 A política exterior argentina e as relações com o Brasil, Revista
Múltipla, Brasília: União Pioneira de Integracão Social, UPIS,
julho 1998; $n^{o}$ 4, p. 95-104.


 Las percepciones de la actual política exterior argentina sobre
la política exterior del Brasil y las relaciones Estados Unidos-Brasil.
In: Estudios Internacionales, Santiago: Instituto de Estudios
Internacionales de la Universidad de Chile, año XXXII, $n^{\circ}$ 125,
enero-abril de 1999; p. 51-82.


Sistema Mundial y Mercosur. Globalización, Regionalismo y
Políticas Exteriores Comparadas, Buenos Aires: Universidad
Nacional del Centro de la Provincia de Buenos Aires/Nuevohacer/
Grupo Editor Latinoamericano, 2000.


Argentina. La crisis del desarrollo y de su inserción internacional,
São Paulo: Fundação Konrad Adenauer e Programa de Estudos
Europeos, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Série Análisis
e Informaciones $n^{\circ}$ 1, maio, 2001.


Política


El Mercosur y las contradictorias políticas de Argentina y
Brasil. Carta Internacional, São Paulo: USP
Internacional, $n^{o}$ 102, agosto, 2001.


273


RAÚL BERNAL-MEZA


- Argentina: ¿crisis coyuntural o estructural? Carta Internacional,
São Paulo: USP – Política Internacional, $n^{o}$ 99, maio, 2001;
p. 7-10.


Política Exterior Argentina: de Menem a De la Rúa ¿hay una
nueva política?, São Paulo: Perspectiva, Fundação SEADE,
vol. 16, $n^{\circ}$ 1, jan-mar 2002; p. 74-93.


A política exterior do Brasil: 1990-2002. Revista Brasileira de
Política Internacional, Brasília: Instituto Brasileiro de Relações
Internacionais; ano 45, $n^{o}$ 1, p. 36-71.


Cervo, Amado Luiz. Relações Internacionais do Brasil. In: Amado
Luiz Cervo (organizador), O Desafío Internacional, Brasília:
Editora Universidade de Brasília, 1994, p. 9-58.


Os grandes eixos conceituais da política exterior do Brasil.
Revista Brasileira de Política Internacional, Brasília: Instituto
Brasileiro de Relações Internacionais, ano 41, número especial
"40 anos”; 1998,  . 66-84.


 Sob o signo neoliberal: as relações internacionais da América
Latina, Revista Brasileira de Política Internacional, Brasília:
Instituto Brasileiro de Relações Internacionais, ano 43, $n^{\circ}$ 2, 2000;
p. 5-27.


Relações internacionais do Brasil: a era Cardoso. Revista
Brasileira de Política Internacional, Brasília: Instituto Brasileiro
de Relações Internacionais, ano 45, $n^{o}$ 1, 2002; p. 5-35.


Cervo, Amado Luiz & Bueno, Clodoaldo, História da Política Exterior
do Brasil, São Paulo: Editora Ática, 1992.


De la Balze, Felipe A. M. La política exterior en tres tiempos. Los
fundamentos de la nueva política exterior. In: De la Balze, Felipe
A. M. y Roca, Eduardo (compiladores), Argentina y EE.UU.
Fundamentos de una nueva alianza, Buenos Aires: CARI/ABRA;
1997; p. 11-129.


274


POLÍTICA EXTERIOR DE ARGENTINA, CHILE Y BRASIL: PERSPECTIVA COMPARADA


Escudé, Carlos, Realismo Periférico. Fundamentos para la nueva política
exterior argentina, Buenos Aires: Planeta, 1992.


El Realismo de los Estados débiles. La política exterior del primer
Gobierno Menem frente a la teoría de las relaciones internacionales,
Buenos Aires: Grupo Editor Latinoamericano, 1997.


Ferrer, Aldo. Hechos y ficciones de la globalización. Argentina y el
Mercosur en el sistema mundial, Buenos Aires: Fondo de Cultura
Económica, 1998.


Guilhon Albuquerque, José Augusto. La nueva geometría del poder
mundial en las visiones argentina y brasileña. In: Felipe de la Balze
(org.), El futuro del Mercosur entre la retórica y el realismo, Buenos
Aires: CARI, 2000.


Hakim, Peter. Brasil e México: duas maneiras de ser global, Política
Externa, São Paulo: Paz e Terra/USP, vol. 10, $n^{o}$ 4, março, abril-
maio 2002; p. 94-107.


Magnoli, Demetrio; César, Luís Fernando Panelli y Yang, Philip. Em
busca do interesse nacional. Política Externa, vol. 9, $n^{o}$ 1, junho,
julho, agosto 2000; р. 33-50.


Miyamoto, Shiguenoli. O Brasil e as negociações multilaterais. Revista
Brasileira de Política Internacional, ano 43, $n^{o}$ 1, 2000;
p. 119-137.


Muñoz, Heraldo. Las Relaciones Exteriores del Gobierno Militar Chileno,
Santiago: Ediciones del Ornitorrinco, 1986.


A nova Política Internacional, São Paulo: Editora Alfa-Omega
e Fundação Alexandre de Gusmão, 1996.


Pinheiro Guimaraes, Samuel. Os desafios externos para o governo Lula.
Carta Internacional, $n^{o}$ 118, ano X, dezembro, 2002, p. 12-13.
Russell, Roberto. Cambio de régimen y política exterior: el caso de
Argentina (1976-1989), Buenos Aires: Flacso, Serie de
Documentos e Informes de Investigación, diciembre, 1989.


275


RAÚL BERNAL-MEZA


Sennes, Ricardo Ubiraci. A Alca e as Potências Médias: Brasil e México.
In: José Augusto Guilhon Albuquerque y Enrique Altemani de
Oliveira (organizadores), Relações Internacionais e sua construção
jurídica, vol. 3, São Paulo: Editora FTD, 1998; p. 39-73.


Sevares, Julio. Por qué cayó la Argentina. Imposición, crisis y reciclaje
del orden neoliberal, Buenos Aires: Grupo Editorial Norma, 2002.
Klaveren, Alberto van. El análisis de la política exterior latinoamericana:
perspectivas teóricas. In: Heraldo Muñoz y Joseph Tulchin
(comp.), Entre la autonomía y la subordinación. Política Exterior
de los países latinoamericanos, Buenos Aires: Grupo Editor
Latinoamericano, tomo 1, 1984; p. 14-49.


As relações internacionais do Chile durante os anos 90. Os
desafios da globalização. In: José Paradiso, José L. Simón, Alberto
van Klaveren e Antonio Araníbar Quiroga, Política Externa na
América do Sul, São Paulo: Fundação Konrad Adenauer, Cuadernos
Adenauer, 2000, $n^{o}^{\prime}$ 7, p. 87-133.


Vigevani, Tullo, et. al. Globalização e Segurança Internacional: a posição
do Brasil. In: Dupas, Gilberto y Vigevani, Tullo, O Brasil e as
Novas Dimensões da Segurança Internacional, São Paulo: Editora
Alfa-Omega/Fapesp, 1999; p. 53-86.


276


10


FOREIGN POLICY AND POLITICAL REGIME:


THE CASE OF SOUTH AFRICA


Wolfgang Döpcke


I. INTRODUCTION


The experience of South Africa seems to confirm, at first sight,
the existence of a strong relationship between the political regime on
the one hand and foreign policy on the other. Firstly, since the
emergence of the South African apartheid regime as an international
pariah, the issues of the character of the domestic order and international
politics seem to be strongly intertwined, both from the perspective of
the regime and the international environment. South African foreign
policy turned into one of the principal instruments of regime survival,
into a means to protect white racist minority rule. Academic analyses
of South African foreign policy thinking and behavior, of its articulators
and protagonists, its means and instruments have reached some sort
of consensus about these objectives. “Throughout the post-war period”,
argue Mills and Baynham, “successive South African governments
made the creation of a stable regional milieu favorable to South Africa's
economic and security interests a priority goal of foreign policy. Indeed,
the stability of South Africa's domestic political order was perceived as
critically dependent upon the success of such policy".¹ Barber and
Barratt argue similarly in their textbook on the history of South
African Policy. According to them, the preservation of white rule
was the overriding aim of government policy, i.e. an objective which
shaped domestic and foreign policy “as Pretoria fought to ensure the


1 Mills, G. & Baynham, S., South African Foreign Policy, 1945-1990. In: Mills, G. (ed),
From Pariah to Participant: South Africa's Evolving Foreign Relations, 1990-1994, Johannesburg:
(SAIIA) 1994, p.11.


277


WOLFGANG DÖPCKE


security, status and legitimacy of the state within the international
community".2 According to these authors, South African foreign policy
had to adapt to an increasingly hostile international environment, from
where, in the perception of the white political elite, parted the threats
to regime survival. The stringent orientation of foreign policy towards
survival has produced, along the years, a variation of concrete policies
which culminated in the 1980s in military aggressions against the
neighboring countries.


Secondly, South Africa's domestic order turned into an important
issue in post-World War II international politics, as the regime's racial
segregation was considered incompatible with the values of the
community of states. Post-War decolonization and the resulting
independence of the Asian and African colonial territories contributed
substantially to South Africa's international isolation and the resurgence
of an active stance against the apartheid regime on a world scale.
Rejection of racial discrimination, especially in its perverse form
practiced by South Africa's whites, was one of the few non-controversial
issues in the post-World War II international community.


As the South African regime reduced effectively “national
interests , as expressed in foreign policy, to minority group interests
and utilized the foreign policy apparatus to enhance the group's survival
in power, the legitimacy of the regime, representing South Africa
internationally, was contested not only on moral grounds, resulting in
the effective isolation of the country from the international community,
but also in practical terms by a “counter foreign policy" conducted by
the liberation movements, chiefly by the African National Congress
(ANC). The international representation of the country became a highly
contested issue, and by the 1970s the “counter foreign policy of the
ANC had made significant inroads in substituting the regime as the
legitimate representative of the people of South Africa vis-a-vis the
international community. The ANC, according to Evans and others,
"became a significant actor in world politics, [which] seriously


2 Barber, J. & Barratt, J., South Africa's Foreign Policy. The Search for Status and Security,
1945-1988, Cambridge (CUP) 1990, p.1.


278


FOREIGN POLICY AND POLITICAL REGIME: THE CASE OF SOUTH AFRICA


hampered South Africa's ability as a normal state”.3 That was the origin
of a distinct foreign policy tradition, which, in the early 1990s, came
to influence South Africa's new foreign policy.


The South African regime, in turn, sought to build its
international legitimacy within the ideological framework of the Cold
War divisions, projecting itself as an arduous defender of Western
political (and culturally Occidental) interests against the “communist
menace". Although it did not achieve a formal alliance with Western
powers and a formal admittance into Western global defense strategy,
South Africa was rather successful – economically, ideologically and
politically - in forging links with the West.4 Consequently, much
more closely than other countries the regime's existence became linked
to international politics, making the regime very susceptible to the
international political conjuncture. Thus, one can argue that, at least
partially, the regime was brought down by the international
environment  the end of Communism, sanctions and disinvestments,
and the massive Cuban and Soviet engagement in Angola.


Thirdly, the radical regime change in South Africa towards a
democratic and non-racial state inspired, it seems, an equally radical
reorientation in the country's foreign policy. Aggressive destabilization
and non-declared wars against its neighbors gave way to a pacific, anti-
hegemonic multilateralism, guided by values such as the peaceful
resolution of conflicts, respect of its neighbors sovereignty, rule-based
interaction of the international community, multiparty democracy,
human rights and freedoms, non-racialism and non-sexism, among
others. Africa-centrism and the philosophy of “Third Worldism and
Non-alignment substituted the desperate obsession of white-ruled
South Africa to project itself as part of a narrowly defined “Western “
or “European civilization and of global anti-communism. Thus, the
change in foreign policy between the apartheid period and the new


3 Evans, G., South Africa in Remission. The Foreign Policy of an Altered State, Journal of
Modern African Studies, 34, 1996.


4 Borstelmann, Th., Apartheid's Reluctant Uncle. The United States and Southern Africa in the
Early Cold War, New York & Oxford: (OUP) 1993.


279


WOLFGANG DÖPCKE


South Africa, i.e. between two distinct regimes, could not have been
greater.


South Africa's international insertions changed profoundly when
the apartheid regime was defeated: the former international pariah was
not only readmitted into the international community, with the end
of economic and other sanctions and its return to international
organizations, but also transformed itself into an highly esteemed
member of the international community, a fact which, combined with
Nelson Mandela's moral standing and reputation, led to high, though
unrealistic, expectations and hopes about South Africa's real
international power. Most dramatic was the country's insertion into
the regional context. South Africa, which during the apartheid years
was perceived by its neighbors as the main – perhaps the only – security
-
threat in the region, and as the prime obstacle for peace and economic
and social development, was expected to change its regional role from
a coercive hegemon into a cooperative leader.


The empirical evidence for a close relation between regime change
the transformation of apartheid South Africa into a democratic,
non-racial and Black-ruled state – and foreign policy change seems
overwhelming and in a certain way obvious. Nevertheless, a close
examination of the conduct of South Africa's foreign policy in the
critical period since the early 1990s, as well as in a broader historical
context, casts some serious doubts on an intimate and mechanical nexus
between the nature of the regime and foreign policy.


In the first place, there were some dramatic changes in the
conduct of foreign policy, its perceptions, ideologies, instruments and,
at least, short-term aims during the apartheid years. There surely exist
fundamental differences between Verword's “outward movement" of
the 1960s, the policy of détente, which lasted until the mid-1970s
and the "Total Strategy of Botha's government during the 1980s,
although all these major foreign policy shifts represent variations of
the principal theme of regime survival in different international and
regional environments.


Secondly, some of the major changes in the conduct of foreign
policy seem to have occurred well before a definite regime change.


280


FOREIGN POLICY AND POLITICAL REGIME: THE CASE OF SOUTH AFRICA


The abandonment of coercive and military hegemony was initiated,
and demonstrated its first concrete result in the settlement of the
Namibia question even before the succession of Botha by F.W. de
Klerk as State and National Party President in early 1989. Even before
the strategic decisions to initiate a political dialog with the Black
opposition had been put into practice (early 1990) – a step which
ultimately led to the formulation of a new constitution and to free
elections in 1994 – South Africa foreign policy had already been
realigned and Pretoria's “New Diplomacy” was to orient the country's
international insertion. Within the structures of the “old” regime the
new foreign policy objectives, later to be imprinted upon the State,
were formulated and initially realized. Thus, observers point to a
striking continuity in foreign policy praxis (though not in its rhetoric)
between the final years of the apartheid regime and the succeeding
ANC government.


Thirdly, there seems to exist more profound continuities in South
Africa's foreign policy behavior and its objectives, transcending the
two regimes. The most important of these continuities derive from
South Africa's economic insertion into the region, its potential economic
hegemony and the articulation of economic interests in South Africa's
foreign policy behavior. It can be argued that South Africa's economic
hegemonic potential was not always and exclusively instrumentalized
for political aims, i.e. as a weapon to drive African states into
submission, but it was also driven by genuine economic interests like
the search for markets. Southall for example tries to show that South
Africa's “outward policy did have major political, diplomatic and
military aims, but was also “unambiguously associated with ... South
Africa' urgent search for new markets.”5 Thus, one striking feature of
South Africa's new, post-apartheid foreign policy, i.e. the imperative
of serving the economic interests of the country, which led to a dramatic
export offensive towards Black Africa in the 1990s, might have
structural roots, showing a complex continuity with former regimes.


5 Southall, R., South Africa in Africa: foreign policy making during the apartheid era,
www.igd.org.za/pub/op.html, 1999.


281


WOLFGANG DÖPCKE


The above outlined questioning of a straight and mechanical
relation between foreign policy and political regime in the South African
case will be exemplified in the following historical appreciation of the
country's foreign policy.


II. SOUTH AFRICAN FOREIGN POLICY UNTIL 1988


The region at the Southern end of the African continent came
under European influence and control in the 17th century, initially as
an unimportant entrepôt of the Dutch mercantilist trade empire.
Already under Dutch control the few white residents developed a trend
to settle permanently: an incipient settler colony came into being, very
much against the will of the Dutch government. This process gained
enormous momentum when, during the Napoleonic Wars, Great
Britain took over control of the Cape Colony and incorporated it
into its growing empire. The influx of white immigrants increased
dramatically after diamonds and gold were discovered in the interior,
which sparked off a process of conquest of these territories by British
imperialism, although they were also claimed by Boer sub-imperialism.
White immigrants never came close to outnumber the African native
population (during the first half of the 20th century, white population
reached a relative peak of ca. 20% of South African population), but
South Africa transformed itself into the only real white settler colony
in Africa and, along the years, developed a diversified industrial
economy, unparalleled in the continent. After two wars (1880-81 and
1899-1902) between British imperialism and Boer opposition, the
modern dimensions of the South African state took shape. In 1910
the establishment of the Union of South Africa, comprising the four
provinces of Transvaal, Orange Free State, Natal and Cape, marks a
significant reconciliation of Boer and British interests, at the cost of
the Black majority: racial segregation inspired the new State and the
exclusion of most Africans from political participation characterized
its Constitution.


The colonial division of the Southern African region at the end
of the 19th century reflects the above described competition between


282


FOREIGN POLICY AND POLITICAL REGIME: THE CASE OF SOUTH AFRICA


British imperialism and the “sub-imperialism of the Boers, but also
British territorial offensives with the aim to contain German and
Portuguese colonialisms. The incorporation of Central/Southern Africa
(Zimbabwe, Zambia, Malawi) into the British sphere owed much to
the alliance of Cape-based British imperialism, South African capital
interests and the South African tradition of settler expansionism. In
the long run British imperialism in South Africa lost much of its
influence: it won the (Boer) War but lost the peace, as the literature
often puts it. In the sub-regional political context, though, it was able
to contain South African expansionism and render as failures (with
the exception of the illegal occupation of Namibia) all of South Africa's
several attempts to incorporate parts of the subcontinent into its own
territory (Smut's grand designs of a “greater Union”, incorporating all
Southern Africa up to a line running through northern Mozambique
to northern Angola; the attempts to integrate Southern Rhodesia as a
fifth province in 1923 and the vigorous attempts to incorporate the
High Commissioner's Territories).6


Despite Great Britain's mild “containment policy, until the end
of the Second World War South Africa's regional interactions occurred
in a friendly colonial environment, which inherited much of South
Africa's tradition of settlers' hegemony and their institutions. This
changed drastically after the end of the Second World War, when the
world came to attach more importance to human rights issues and
entered into its decolonization cycle, whereas South Africa intensified
its racial discrimination after the installation of the National Party
Government in 1948. The coming to power of the National Party, by
a very doubtful electoral margin, representing popular Boer interests,
marked a rupture in the political history of the country. Although
there are important continuities, especially in the treatment of "native
affairs", between the segregationist pre-apartheid period and the


6 As an introduction to South African regional expansionism, offering different interpretations,
see: Hyam, R., The Failure of South African Expansion, 1908-1948, London: Macmillan,
1972. Chanock, M.: Unconsummated Union: Britain, Rhodesia and South Africa, 1900-45,
Manchester: Manchester UP, 1977.


283


WOLFGANG DÖPCKE


apartheid era, it is nevertheless justifiable to argue that in 1948 South
Africa experienced the establishment of a new political regime.


If we consider the basic definition of a political regime as “the
totality of institutions which regulate the struggle for power and the
exercise of power, as well as the praxis of the values which orient and
direct such institutions”, it becomes clear that the apartheid state,
developed from 1948 onwards, represents a distinct regime, not only
in relation to the prior political order and in relation to post-apartheid
South Africa, but also vis-à-visthe other regime types prevalent during
that period: liberal democracy, monarchy, Marxist-Leninist regimes,
military regimes and other manifestations of autocratic rule. Its
underlying philosophy of deep and full restructuring of society along
racial lines is almost unique in human history. Only national-socialist
Germany succeeded in transforming race into such an absolute category
of human existence like the South Africans and only national-socialist
Germany developed an all embracing legal underpinning for its racial
obsession like white South Africa did. But the similarities between
the two regimes cease at this point. Whereas the objectives of German
racial policy were directed towards the “racial purification" of the
German nation, dealing with numerical minorities, and later to similar
objectives in a broader, European context, which effectively led to
policies of physically resettling the "impure races outside the
boundaries of the “Reich” and, when this proved impossible, to murder
them on a gigantic scale, the South African apartheid regime was faced
with the task to reconcile and negotiate two rather contradictory
objectives: the utilization of Black labor, on which the economy and
the whole country depended, and the separation of the whites' and
black's spheres in all imaginable layers of life, with the systematic
exclusion of the African population from political and social
participation and the benefits of the country's resources. Nuremberg-
style laws, like the Prohibition of Mixed Marriages Act of 1949, as
well as complex and sophisticated measures of population movement
control, regulating the admittance to “white areas”, like the Pass Laws,


7 Bobbio, N., et.al., Dicionário de Política, Brasília: Edunb, 1992, p. 1081, (transl. by author).


284


FOREIGN POLICY AND POLITICAL REGIME: THE CASE OF SOUTH AFRICA


were the result of this intricate encounter of “idealist philosophy and
economic necessities.


Another difference between the two racial states is important
for understanding the peculiar character of the South African regime.
Whereas national-socialist Germany was a totalitarian, fascist regime,
South Africa was neither fascist (lacking for example the demagogic
mobilization of the “masses”) nor totalitarian. It was a liberal democracy,
and, at least until the 1980s, a rather thriving one in the African context,
which, similar to classic Greek urban democracy, excluded the majority
of its population from political participation and power.


Apart from the philosophy and governmental practice, the social
basis of political power shifted substantially as a consequence of the
two regime changes which South Africa experienced since the end of
World War II. The Nationalist victory brought to power Afrikaner
middle and lower classes, which used the state to embark on an extensive
program of "positive discrimination”, privileging Afrikanerdom both
against the Black majority and certain interests of international capital.8
The more recent regime change towards a “colorblind” universal liberal
democracy brought to power, in social terms, an emerging African
middle class, forming a tacit alliance with international and national
capital interests.


As we know, the impossibility to reconcile the contradictory
strands of the apartheid era – racial “utopia”, racial privilege and economic
rationality – produced, in the end, the internal causes of the regime's
downfall. But only a series of external events made possible the acceptance
by the regime of the fundamental failure in reaching its objectives.


Between 1945 and 1960, South Africa certainly emerged as what
has been called an “international pariah". But this happened in a


8 This theme, especially the discussion of the relation between capital and apartheid policy,
has produced a great volume of, often contradictory, literature. See, for example: Lipton,
M.; Capitalism and Apartheid. South Africa, 1910-1986, Aldershot: Wildwood House, 1986.
Lapping, B., Apartheid: a History, New York: George Braziller, 1989. Adam, H.; Giliomee,
H., Ethnic Power Mobilized. Can South Africa Change? New Haven and London (Yale UP)
1979. O'Meara, D., Volkskapitalisme. Class, Capital and Ideology in the Development of Afrikaner
Nationalism 1934-1948, Johannesburg: Ravan Press, 1983.


9 Mills, G. & Baynham, S., South African Foreign Policy, 1945-1990, op.cit., p. 10.


285


WOLFGANG DÖPCKE


differentiated manner and to a varying degree. In this period, the
preservation of the white-ruled apartheid order arose as the prime
objective of South Africa's foreign policy. On the international arena,
South Africa tried to link its racial project to the Cold War divisions
and projected itself as the defender of Western interests and civilization.
In a certain way, and despite almost universal condemnations of the
regime's racial policy, South Africa became firmly linked to Western
interests in post-war international order. Western Governments,
especially the "globalist” US administrations, did perceive the South
African "problem on the background of Cold War divisions, be it in
ideological, military and strategic terms (Cape route) or in terms of
supply of strategic raw materials.


Numerous studies confirm this assessment. For example: writing
on the early post-War South African policy by the United States,
Borstelman argues that the globalist Cold War perspective of US
foreign policy towards Africa transformed America into a strong
supporter of the white minority and of colonial regimes:


In its pursuit of the preoccupying goals of containing
communism [...] the Truman administration provided critical
assistance to the reassertion of white authority in southern Africa
after World War II. The United States acted, in sum, as a reluctant
uncle
or god parent
at the baptism of apartheid.10


US policy towards South Africa, although having this broad
Cold War thread as its basis, oscillated between more globalist and
more regionalist perspectives. Jimmy Carter's administration, for
example, started with a regionalist view on the conflicts in Southern
Africa, i.e. not attributing them to the struggle between “world
communism" and Western interests, emphasizing the question of
human rights and condemning the racist suppression in South Africa.
Carter's government voted thus in favor of the mandatory weapons'
ban against South Africa in 1977. Towards the end of his term of


10 Borstelmann, Th., op.cit., p. 197.


286


FOREIGN POLICY AND POLITICAL REGIME: THE CASE OF SOUTH AFRICA


office, Carter had transformed himself into a stern globalist; he became
convinced that the invasion of Zaire's Shaba province was an
international communist conspiracy, and reacted accordingly.'


The globalist perspective in US policy reached a climax when,
in 1981, R. Reagan came to power and brought, as a “wedding present”
to South Africa's whites, his policy of “constructive engagement”. This
policy, being articulated especially by Reagan's Assistant Secretary for
African Affairs, Chester Crocker, supported a non-confrontation
approach towards South Africa's white rulers, considered allies in the
global struggle against communism. Through an “associative and
constructive dialog with South Africa's whites, the United States,
which came to substitute Great Britain and Portugal as the chief Western
power in the region, meant to create incentives for opening and change
in the South African system. Besides displaying in practice a passive
attitude towards apartheid, Constructive Engagement offered a carte
blanche to the regime's aggressive regional policy of destabilization of
the 1980s. 11 Reagan's, and also Thatcher's ascension to power and the
resulting renewed Cold War fundamentalism in international relations
rendered the South African regime and its struggle for survival a short,
but significant, Indian summer, during almost the whole decade of
the 1980s.


Economically, South Africa was firmly entrenched in the Western
world, having developed very significant trade and investment links
with major Western countries, principally Great Britain. Thus, until
the 1980s, all demands for economic boycott of the country, articulated


11 Wenzel, Cl., Die Südafrikapolitik der USA in der Ära Reagan. Konstruktives oder destruktives
Engagement, Hamburg: Institut für Afrikakunde, 1990. Marte, L. F.: Political Cycles
International Relations: the Cold War and Africa 1945-1990, Amsterdam: VU UP, 1994.
Laïdi, Z., The Superpowers and Africa. The Constraints of a Rivalry, 1960-1990, Chicago &
London: Chicago UP, 1990. Coker, C., The United States and South Africa, 1968-1985:
Constructive Engagement and its Critics, Durham: Duke University Press, 1986. But see as
well Martin, who argues that US policy towards Africa had been more tolerant and more
differentiated than the idea of an anti-communist crusade would suggest. Martin, B., American
Policy Towards Southern Africa in the 1980s. Journal of Modern African Studies, 27,1,
p. 23-46, 1989. See as well: Crocker, Ch., High noon in Southern Africa. Making Peace in a
Rough Neighborhood, New York & London: W.W. Norton & Co., 1992.


287


WOLFGANG DÖPCKE


as “voluntary by UN organs with democratic representation, like the
General Assembly, were vetoed by Western economic interests. Mainly
the US and Great Britain prevented these moves to become mandatory
and firmly defended the South African regime, advocating a strict
separation of political and economic issues and arguing that sanctions
would hurt the African population. As a result, South Africa became
politically isolated from the majority of Third World states (that broke
off diplomatic relations) and banned from many, though not all,
multilateral organizations. Non-economic boycotts, like the sports
boycott, had widespread adherence, but, although they were symbolically
important and provoked a great deal of resentment among South African
whites, did not represent a significant threat to the regime's survival.


Western attitudes began to change gradually in the second half
of the 1970s. Reflecting a relative decrease in economic importance to
the West (and the accompanying rise of Nigeria as the major trading
nation of the continent) and reacting to the brutal suppression of the
1976 Soweto protests and the killing of Steven Biko in 1977, while
in police detention, Western countries began to harden their attitude
towards the apartheid state, although avoiding a mandatory economic
boycott. In October of 1977, the UN Security Council for the first
time abandoned its tradition of vetoing mandatory measures against
South Africa, and decreed a arms ban against the country. This move
occurred 14 years after the UN General Assembly had declared a
voluntary ban in 1963. Although South Africa had developed certain
local arms production, this arms sales ban really hurt, and presented
South Africa with a major problem, especially in its conventional
warfare in Angola.


This first coercive step by Western countries was accompanied
by a slight and rather cosmetic move on the economic front, in no
way decisive. In 1974, Great Britain and, in 1977, the European
Community established codes of conduct for their firms operating in
South Africa. In 1978, the US passed a similar code (Sullivan Principles)
as guidelines for US companies in South Africa. On the other hand,
the Soweto revolt and political instability led to a crisis of confidence
and a certain restraint of foreign investments.


288


FOREIGN POLICY AND POLITICAL REGIME: THE CASE OF SOUTH AFRICA


However, despite the weapons' sale ban and the dramatically
increasing internal conflict, South Africa continued to enjoy relatively
stable relations with its main trading partners in the West. These stable
relations finally collapsed when after 1984 a new wave of protest and
violent repression seized the country, which drove South Africa close
to a state of nongovernability. The West, deeply disappointed with
President Botha's “reforms” and increasingly pressurized by civil society,
finally passed significant economic measures against the apartheid
regime.


These coercive economic measures against the regime started in
1986 and were pioneered by the Commonwealth, except Great Britain
and the United States. After a profound shift of US public opinion,
the North American Congress passed that year the Comprehensive
Anti Apartheid Act, which led to the abandonment of Reagan's
approach of “constructive engagement towards South Africa and the
implementation of rather severe economic sanctions against the regime
by the US administration. Apart from significantly hurting South
African exports to the US, the sanctions caused some major US
companies to cease operations in the country. At about the same time
(September/October 1986), the European Community finally made
its move and passed a package of measures which aimed at halting
investments in the apartheid state and banning a range of South African
products imported by EEC markets. Japan followed suit in 1986.
These measures, although never reaching the scope of a comprehensive
economic boycott, certainly contributed to the regime's downfall. They
increased sufficiently the crisis of confidence, which the regime suffered
due especially to widespread insurrections and the rapidly deteriorating
internal security situation, leading to capital flight, disinvestments,
chronic inflation, difficulties in serving the growing foreign debt and
a dramatic devaluation of the country's currency.


Thus, to conclude this part of the present paper, South Africa's
insertion into the West and its relations with western powers did
experience until the mid-1980s a high degree of stability and
continuity, despite the worldwide moral rejection of the apartheid
regime. There was no major policy change in foreign policy during


289


WOLFGANG DÖPCKE


the long period from 1945 to the early 1980s. Consequently, the
contested arena of South Africa's international environment was not
so much the global but the regional environment in the African
continent. On this stage we can observe major foreign policy changes
within the apartheid regime since the end of the Second World War,
as well as surprising continuities between the last years of the apartheid
regime and the foreign policy of the ANC government after 1994.


III. SOUTH AFRICA AND AFRICA, 1945-1988


South African foreign policy since the end of the Second World
War, focusing on the African and regional contexts has been divided in
various ways by the relevant literature. Although the creation of a non-
threatening, favorable regional and continental environment was the
dominant thread in South Africa's regional policy, there were significant
shifts and changes in the policies to implement such objective. Barber
and Barratt, for example, try to understand the oscillations in South
African foreign policy as cycles of challenges and reactions. They
identify four major periods: 1945 to the early 1960s (reaction to
growing international hostility and to African Nationalism); early
1960s to 1974 (the challenge by decolonization and internal nationalism
was neutralized by economic growth and the ring of white territories);
1974 to 1984 (breakdown of white security ring) and from 1984-5
onwards (uprising and economic deterioration). 12 Mills and Baynham
distinguish five periods until the demise of the apartheid regime: 1945
to 1960 (emergence of South Africa as an international pariah); 1961
to 1974 (the outward movement); 1975 to 1980 (Total National
Strategy); 1980 to 1984 (Regional repression and internal reform);
1985 to 1990 (from emergency to accord).13 Finally, Southall suggests
three main periods: 1948 to 1961 (resistance and adjustment to Africa's
decolonization; 1961 to 1976 (emergence as “sub-imperial power);
1976 to 1980s (transition from détente to destabilization).14 What


12 Barber, J. & Barratt, J., South Africa's Foreign Policy, op. cit.


13 Mills, G. & Baynham, S., op. cit.


14 Southall, R., South Africa in Africa, op.cit.


290


FOREIGN POLICY AND POLITICAL REGIME: THE CASE OF SOUTH AFRICA


emerges from these, and other periodizations, and what is relevant for
our argument, is that since 1945 the pursuit of the security interests of
South Africa in the sub-regional contest has produced at least three
very distinct sets of policies, each of them distinct in terms of immediate
objectives, policies and instruments.


Since the early 1950s, South African regional policy was put in
the defensive, despite sometimes spectacular temporary successes. It
reacted to challenges, which were considered to become more and
more threatening. 15 The initial reaction to the increasingly hostile
international environment and the emergence of Black Nationalism
was the intensification of apartheid efforts. Regionally, the decade of
the 1950s was characterized by determined, though unsuccessful,
attempts to incorporate the HC Territories.


According to Southall, during the 1960s South Africa emerged
as the economic giant on the continent, a “sub-imperial” power. “The
most immediate manifestation of South Africa's sub-imperial role was
its 'outward' policy: the systematic expansion of its relations with white-
controlled and any black-ruled states that were prepared to ignore their
distaste for apartheid in return for perceived material or political
advantage." 16 However, the “outward movement”, i.e. the attempt to
establish regular political and diplomatic relations with the African
community of states, was much more than a cynical strategy to lure
moderate states closer to South Africa by economic and financial bribes.
It had, as one underlying theme, clear economic interests and a broad
perspective of South Africa's economic insertion into the continent.
One South African concern was the labour supply to its booming
economy, maintained, to an important degree, by migrant labour flows
from neighbouring countries. The maintenance of foreign migrant
labour flows from the whole of Southern Africa (Swaziland, Botswana,
Mozambique, Malawi and, to a minor degree, Angola) became an
important objective of the policy of rapprochement with African states.


15 See Barber and Barratt's comprehensive study, which interprets South African foreign
policy as cycles of challenge and reaction. Barber, J. & Barratt, J. op. cit.
16 Southall, op. cit., p. 10.


291


WOLFGANG DÖPCKE


Energy supplies, according to Southall, were another central economic
concern, to be solved by regional cooperation. Thirdly, and most
importantly, was the search for (African) markets for South Africa's
growing secondary industry, a necessity given the restrictions of the
home-market and serious balance of payment problems. South Africa
successfully launched an export drive and established trade and other
economic relations with a couple of African countries, overcoming
even this traditional bias with respect to Southern Africa, especially
the SACU (Southern African Customs Union) countries. The political
project of the rapprochement with Africa, seen as a dialogue which was
successful with a couple of “moderate states (for example Malawi,
Ivory Coast and other francophone states, Kenya, Sierra Leone) and
even led to some sort of softening, though very ambiguously, of the
official African position towards South Africa in the “Lusaka Manifest”
of 1969.


As argued by Mills and Baynham, the “outward movement"
was lost with South Africa's engagement in the guerilla wars in
Portuguese Africa and Southern Rhodesia. Despite the apparent
acceptance of African decolonization and the independence of the HC
territories, and despite of the attempt to establish normal and non-
violent relations with African states, the cordon sanitaire, i.e. the security
ring of white-ruled or colonial states around South Africa (Angola,
Mozambique, Rhodesia) was considered a vital part of its regime
security. Thus pro-colonial cooperation with Portugal and the white
regime of Ian Smith became one dominant feature even at the height
of the "outward movement”.


The collapse of Portuguese colonialism in Africa, following the
overthrow of the Salazarist regime in April 1974, had a dramatic impact
on the balance of power in Southern Africa. The initial reaction of the
Pretoria regime in face of the dismantling of its cordon sanitaire was
“cooly statemanlike”, 17 at least as far as the independence of “Marxist”
Mozambique was concerned. The exposure of South Africa's and
Namibia's borders to potentially hostile, anti-apartheid states, and the


17 Legum, C., Southern Africa. The Secret Diplomacy, London: Rex Collings, 1975, p. 5.


292


FOREIGN POLICY AND POLITICAL REGIME: THE CASE OF SOUTH AFRICA


encircling of its only remaining white ally – Southern Rhodesia/
Zimbabwe -, led to the formulation of a new initiative, the so-called
détente – which governed South African regional policies during the
mid-1970s. The underlying philosophy of this approach was a specific
reading of the new regional situation. It was based on the hope that
economic dependence would prevent a radicalization of Mozambique
against South Africa and that “moderate” regimes in Africa would
respond positively to South African signals of rapprochement. The key
challenge of détente would be a peaceful solution of the remaining
decolonization conflicts in Southern Africa (Zimbabwe and Namibia)
and the installation in these countries of moderate governments.
Without a solution, these conflicts, according to South African thinking,
would “contaminate” and radicalize the whole region and increase the
determination of African states against South Africa. Consequently,
the apartheid state developed an intense diplomacy aiming at resolving
the constitutional deadlock on the Rhodesian question, involving as
well other southern African states like Zambia. On a continental scale,
some conservative regimes (for example Ivory Coast, Malawi, Liberia)
responded positively to the South African rapprochement.


In the Rhodesian case, Pretoria exerted considerable pressure
upon the white minority regime of Ian Smith to enforce the acceptance
of an African government in this colony. But in relation to the
Namibian question South Africa showed much less inclination for a
change and an effective retreat from this territory, which, according to
international legal opinion, it had occupied illegally. To advance a
constitutional and negotiated solution of the Rhodesian rebellion,
South Africa successfully played the “economic card” towards some of
the Frontline States (FLS), in particular Zambia. This country, and to
a minor degree Tanzania and Botswana, were instrumental in forcing
the liberation movements to the negotiation table, in the same manner
as South Africa successfully pressurized Ian Smith to accept the
inevitable. The result was the so-called Lusaka Agreement of December
1974 and some sort of precarious ceasefire between the contestants.
Détente reached a public climax when, in August 1975, fearing the
derailment of its efforts, Pretoria succeeded in staging an encounter


293


WOLFGANG DÖPCKE


between Ian Smith, Kenneth Kaunda, the leaders of the Zimbabwean
liberation movements and President Vorster, on the Victoria Falls
bridge. To realize such conference, Vorster, as well as the FLS, had to
dramatically increase their pressure upon their allies, which led
effectively to the recall of South African combat assistance to Rhodesia
and the imprisonment of détente adversaries within the liberation
movements by the FLS.


Détente failed in the end, or, as one could also argue, temporarily,
as far as the Rhodesian question was concerned. It failed absolutely
from the point of view of South African objectives. The reasons for
the failure were connected with Ian Smith's refusal to consider African
majority rule, the divisions among the Black Zimbabwean nationalists,
South Africa's own inflexibility in the Namibian question and the
restraint exercised by the West towards the South African initiative.


However, according to general opinion, it was the South African
military intervention in the Angolan civil war, culminating in a massive
invasion between September/October 1975 and January 1976, which
dealt the deathblow to détente.18 Curiously, the invasion, which did
provoke a u-turn in regional international relations, can be considered
as an attempt to save the détente exercise (but also South African
hegemony over Namibia). A radical, “Marxist” government in Luanda
was considered, not only by South Africa but also by Zambia, Zaire
and other conservative states, as a threat and as a fundamental obstacle
to the policy of promoting dependent and moderate regimes in the
region. On the other hand, although having détente as its motive, the
South African military intervention founded a new strand of regional
policy, which came to dominate during the first half of the 1980s:
violent, military destabilization. Before the intervention, South Africa
had secretly cooperated with Portugal in the combat of the guerrilla
movements and frequently crossed the Namibian-Angolan border in
pursuit of SWAPO fighters. On the Zimbabwean stage, it participated


18 Legum, C., Southern Africa. The Secret Diplomacy, London: Rex Collings, 1975. Legum,
C.: Southern Africa: How the Search for Peaceful Change Failed. In: Legum, C. (org.), Africa
Contemporary Record 1975/1976, London: Rex Collings, 1976.


294


FOREIGN POLICY AND POLITICAL REGIME: THE CASE OF SOUTH AFRICA


in combat by sending a small paramilitary police force. Nevertheless,
so far South Africa had never used seriously its military force to
intervene into a neighboring country. Although the Angolan
intervention could be characterized as a détente exercise with military
means, it was the beginning of a radical shift in South Africa's regional
policy, the beginning of a massive violent and repressive intervention
against the independent states of the subcontinent.


The opportunity for intervention arose when the Angolan
decolonization, after the breakdown of the Alvor Agreement in March
1975, rapidly deteriorated into a civil war between the MPLA, FNLA
and Unita, 19 involving regular troops from Zaire and also armed exile
groups like the "Katanga Gendarmes”. The South African decision to
intervene was made, according to observers, on a rather ad-hoc basis
and did not follow a clear and genuine political or military planning. 20
According to Grundy, the military involvement, which was very
moderate considering South African armed potential, was the outcome
of a power struggle over regional policy in the heart of South Africa's
regime and reflected a “compromise character of the decision and the
conduct of the intervention, by which the hawks [mainly the SADF]
secured the decision to attack provided the doves [the  politicians and
the DFA] were mollified by a less intensive and extensive SADF
deployment."21


The South African military campaign was accompanied by some
fundamental miscalculations. In first place, South Africa seriously
misjudged the determination and military potential both of her enemies
(MPLA) and her Angolan allies (FNLA, Unita). Secondly, apart from
receiving tacit approval by some conservative states, South Africa did
not foresee the devastating political impact the invasion would provoke


19 FNLA - Frente Nacional de Libertação de Angola. Unita - União Nacional para a
Independência Total de Angola. MPLA  Movimento Popular de Libertação de Angola.
20 Stultz, N.H., South Africa in Angola and Namibia. In: Blight, J. & Weiss, Th. G. (orgs.).
The suffering grass: superpowers and regional conflict in Southern Africa and the Caribbean,
Boulder: Lynne Rienner, 1992. Grundy, K. W., The Militarization of South African Politics,
Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press, 1988.


21 Grundy, K. W., The Militarization of South African Politics, Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1988, p. 90. SADF – South Africa Defense Force.


295


WOLFGANG DÖPCKE


on the continent and, in turn, the legitimacy it rendered to the MPLA
government. Thirdly, especially after encountering almost no resistance
on its way towards Luanda, South Africa did not expect the substantial
assistance Luanda was receiving in arms supplies from the Soviet Union
and even less the presence of Cuban troops on the side of the MPLA
army. Fourthly, and perhaps most importantly, the formal US support,
which South Africa was expecting, did not materialize. Although the
then US Secretary of State, Henry Kissinger, always denied it, it seems
clear that the US had prior knowledge of South African intentions,
and were monitoring the advance of its troops on Angolan territory.
Marte and others analysts argue convincingly that one of the main
objects of the invasion would be “to forge a formal Cold War alliance
with the US, which was to serve as a smoke screen for maintaining
white dominance in southern Africa.”22 But, fearing a new Vietnam,
the US declined any formal support and left the South Africans on
their own, deeply disappointed by the "treason of the West. Faced
with the possibility of a prolonged conventional war against Cuban
soldiers and Soviet arms, only with very weak allies on its side (FNLA,
Unita), South Africa opted for a rapid retreat from the Angolan scene
in January 1976, suffering the traumatic experience of fighting militarily
for the first time an “African war” and not being able to reach any of
its objectives.


Détente was revived in the Zimbabwean case in late 1970s, again
based on a fundamental miscalculation of the relative strength of
“enemies” and “allies”, this time not only made by South Africa, but
also by conservative Western Governments, like Margaret Thatcher's
administration. The outcome, again, did not please South Africa and
finally sealed the fate of the détente policy, paving the way for military
aggressions as a strategy in regional policy.


The Zimbabwean question came to prominence again after the
guerrilla campaign gained much impetus with the breakdown of the
first détente exercise and the independence of Mozambique, which
exposed suddenly the racist regime to infiltration by armed nationalist


22 Marte, L. F., op. cit., p. 317.


296


FOREIGN POLICY AND POLITICAL REGIME: THE CASE OF SOUTH AFRICA


forces along its more than 1000 kilometers of border with the Frelimo
state. But also the coming into office of a new US administration
under Jimmy Carter, initially with a stringent regionalist perspective
towards the conflicts in Southern Africa, strained US-South African
relations and made South Africa revive its attempts to achieve a
negotiated solution in Zimbabwe which would install a moderate Black
government. Reacting to these internal and external pressures, Smith
and Vorster launched the so-called “internal settlement , which,
counting with the collaboration of one (or two) of the nationalist
leaders – Bishop Abel Muzorewa (and N. Sithole) – introduced a new
constitution, gave the country its first Black Prime Minister but left
power effectively in the hands of the white minority. It failed to curb
the violence and the guerilla campaign, which instead increased
dramatically in 1979, and did not receive international recognition.
When, in 1979, the new conservative British Government showed a
certain inclination to recognition of the Muzorewa government, it
was Nigeria's firm posture and its economic power, as well as pressures
from the Commonwealth, which made M. Thatcher think twice.
Consequently, the revival of Anglo-American constitutional proposals
led to the convening of the Lancaster House Conference in December
1979, this time including the two liberation movements, which in
the end were forced by the Frontline States to accept a negotiated
solution. Britain's and South Africa's approval of free elections in
Zimbabwe were based on the conviction, that the moderate Bishop,
instead of the “communist terrorists", would win such elections,
especially considering the massive assistance he was receiving from the
Botha government. Another miscalculation! In the March 1980
elections, Mugabe's Zanu won 51 out of 80 seats – Muzorewa won
only 3 - and subsequently formed a coalition government with
Nkomo's Zapu, giving the nationalists an overwhelming majority in
the country's first majority-ruled parliament.


As a result, in 1980 the cordon sanitaire finally collapsed and
South Africa saw itself surrounded by African states, very likely to
assume a proactive, hostile policy vis-à-visthe apartheid regime and to
support the South African liberation movements. This transformed


297


WOLFGANG DÖPCKE


regional situation, the growing internal insecurity and the first signs of
growing international effective hostility towards the regime (UN arms'
embargo) brought to a final end the détente approach and led to a
dramatic reformulation of South Africa's regional policy and the
launching of the “Total National Strategy”. This radical security policy
was based on the classical “zero-sum” game philosophy of a communist
threat, i.e. attributed all security threats to the regime (for example
the encircling of South Africa by “radical” regimes, the political and
military campaigns in favour of a non-racist and democratic state carried
out by SWAPO and the ANC, as well as the internal resistance) to
one single cause: the so-called “total onslaught by Marxism,
communism and the Soviet Union. This "total attack" had to be
countered by a  total strategy” in order to secure South Africa's survival.
Although "total strategy had been “pre-thought” and conceptualized
within the South African Ministry of Defense already in 1977, it
only came to be applied after détente was in shatters with Mugabe's
victory in Zimbabwe, and when the resurgence of a Cold War
fundamentalism in US foreign policy created a permissive international
environment.


South African “Total Strategy” combined, in its regional focus,
the following elements:


1) Direct military destabilization by rather large-scale military
interventions and conventional warfare, without a formal declaration
of war (in Angola from 1981 onwards).


2) Open combat assistance to insurgency groups (to Angola's
Unita from 1981 onwards).


3) Financial and logistical assistance, provision of training
facilities, arms' supplies and offering of safe retreat zones for insurgency
and terrorist groups in Southern Africa in the fight of these groups
against the "radical governments in the region: Unita in Angola,
Renamo in Mozambique, the militias of Muzorewa and Sithole as
well as Zapu dissidents in Zimbabwe, the so-called Lesotho Liberation
Army in Lesotho. In most cases, these groups were real proxies of
South Africa; the operations, and sometimes the very existence of these
groups, depended entirely on the South African engagement.


298


FOREIGN POLICY AND POLITICAL REGIME: THE CASE OF SOUTH AFRICA


4) Sabotage of economic and military objects in the Frontline
States by South African commandos. The blowing up of the Beira oil
depots, attacks against Zimbabwean military installations and the
destruction of the major part of the air force of this country and attacks
against American-owned oil installations in Cabinda, Angola were the
most spectacular of many acts of sabotage.


5) Economic coercion against those Frontline State which were,
in one way or another, economically or infra-structurally dependent
on South Africa (Zimbabwe, Mozambique, Lesotho, among others).
6) Involvement in coup d'etatsin neighboring countries (Lesotho,


Seychelles).


7) The so-called “forward defense : military attacks and
assassinations against ANC and SWAPO, their bases, offices,
representatives and members, against refugee camps and also against
the police in almost all Frontline States. 23


The chief objectives of the South African destabilization policy
were the coercive “neutralization of the FLS (in respect of their anti-
apartheid attitude) and the elimination of the threat to white hegemony
in South Africa deriving from the activities of the ANC, SWAPO,
the Black Consciousness Movement and, to a minor degree, the PAC
(Pan African Congress of South Africa). The implementation of this
strategy transformed Southern Africa, during the 1980s, into a large
zone of non-declared wars and brought extreme insecurity and hostility
to the sub-regional relations. The human suffering and the material
losses were immense and are calculated in about 1,5 million lives and
US \$ 60 billion.


The South African military strategy was accompanied, once
again, by a scheme of coercive association and cooperation, the
so-called Constellation of Southern African States (Consas). This
scheme represented another attempt to create a cordon sanitaire of
moderate states around South Africa, this time trying to take advantage


23 Hanlon, J, Apartheid's Second Front: South Africa's War Against its Neighbours, Middlesex:
Penguin Books, 1986. Davies, R. und O'Meara, D.; Total Strategy in Southern Africa – An
Analysis of South African Regional Policy since 1978, Chan, St. (org.); exporting Apartheid.
Foreign Policy in Southern Africa 1978-1988, p. 179, London: Macmillan, 1990.


299


WOLFGANG DÖPCKE


of economic dependency and of the “fear” by conservative governments
of leftwing radicalism and communism, represented presumably by
the anti-apartheid forces. But the explicit refusal of even the economically
dependent states, like the BLS States, 24 to participate in such scheme
and the foundation of the Southern African Development Coordination
Conference (SADCC) in 1980, as a direct challenge to South African
economic hegemony, rendered abortive all attempts of association and
reduced "Total Strategy effectively to its military and violent components.


From today's perspective, South Africa's “Total Strategy" appears
very much a desperate, useless attempt to prevent the inevitable from
happening. But during the revived Cold War antagonism and R.
Reagan's crusade against the “Empire of Evil”, the utilization of South
Africa's military (and economic) supremacy to openly coerce African
States into subservience seemed, from the South African point of view,
a viable strategy. Initially, this approach resulted in impressive gains.
"South Africa's position as the dominant power in all of southern
Africa increased dramatically”, argued R. Rotberg by then.


By mid-decade, South Africa had no local or global rivals
for preeminence in the region south of Zaire and Tanzania.
Despite its own profoundly unstable core, the extent of its newly
accomplished hegemony had exceeded even the expectations of
South Africa's most optimistic strategic planners. 25


As a result of destabilization, South Africa was able to dictate to
its neighbors the acceptance of so-called “non-aggression treaties”, in
which the African governments were obliged to deny bases and other
infra-structural support to the liberation movements (ANC and
SWAPO) in exchange for the South African promise, never fulfilled,
to stop the destabilization aggressions (Treaty with Swaziland in 1982,
Lusaka Treaty with Angola in 1984 and the Nkomati Treaty with
Mozambique of the same year).


24 BSL States - Botswana, Swaziland, Lesotho.


25 Rotberg, R.I., Introduction: South Africa in the Region – Hegemony and Vulnerability.
In: Rotberg, R.I. (et. al.): South Africa and its Neighbors. Regional Security and Self-Interest,
Lexington: Mass. Lexington Books, 1985. p. 1.


300


FOREIGN POLICY AND POLITICAL REGIME: THE CASE OF SOUTH AFRICA


The implementation of South Africa's "Total Strategy" as a
coherent strategy represents a dramatic shift in foreign policy, i.e. is a
foreign policy change within the same regime. But at the same time it
was intimately linked to broader political shifts within this regime
and its power base, especially the rise to prime office (office of Prime
Minister reps. of President) of P.W. Botha and, with this, the
centralization of the key political and strategic decisions in the hands
of a small power elite, composed predominantly of police and military
personnel. In 1977 P.W. Botha himself, a Minister of Defense, was
instrumental in the formulation of the principles of “Total Strategy”.
After his taking office, South Africa saw the “militarization” of its
power structure and policy, in response to the internal and external
threats, 26 in which the South African Defense Force (SADF) rose from
an instrument of implementation to an organ of formulation of South
African policy. Linked to this was the rise of the so-called security
establishment, in the form of the State Security Council (SSC), in the
center of the South African decision making process, in which the
military had a majority. Thus, a militarized executive gained supreme
power at the expense of the traditional power locus of white South
Africa (the National Party), the (white) Parliament and those Ministries
which were not straightforwardly linked to the military option,
especially the diplomatic bureaucracy of the Department of Foreign
Affairs (DFA).27 The rise of the military to political power was also
accompanied by a division within the white bloc and the resurgence
of a radical conservative opposition against the National Party.


IV. THE "NEW DIPLOMACY"


At the height of South African regional coercive hegemony
during the mid-1980s the ground was prepared for the final collapse
of the regime. This complete dénouement of the white state, which,


26 Grundy, K. W., The Militarization of South African Politics, Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1988.
27 Ibid., p. 88.


301


WOLFGANG DÖPCKE


from today's perspective, seemed inevitable following an inescapable,
inherent logic, was unimaginable in the mid-1980s. Furthermore, even
with secret meetings taking place between Mandela and members of
the South African Government since 1986, and the process of
transformation set in motion in early 1990s, its final outcome was, by
then, still unpredictable. Thus, the next radical shift in foreign policy,
which began to take shape in the second half of the 1980s and which
led, consequently, to the abandonment of the military option and of
destabilization, happened in a domestic environment characterized by
much more uncertainty than it would appear from today's perspective.


The reasons for the regime's collapse, which can't be analyzed
here, have been explained in the relevant literature.28 What is important
for our argument is the fact that the reorientation in foreign policy
began well before the regime change, or even before the transition
towards the new regime. The abandonment of destabilization policies
and the setting of the direction towards a new foreign policy occurred
still within the old apartheid regime. In regional politics, the beginning
of the changes pre-date even the substitution of Botha by F.W. de
Klerk as President in 1989, although it might be argued that the
abandonment of destabilization as a main point might only have
occurred with de Klerk coming to power. From this perspective, the
internal turning point is represented by de Klerk's famous speech of 2
of February 1990, when he announced the lift of the ban and
restrictions against the opposition groups and the release from prison
of Nelson Mandela. 29


The change in regional policies became visible much earlier,
exactly with the negotiations of the South African retreat from
Namibia and the independence of this country. Since the formulation
in 1982 of the linkage between the Namibian independence and the
retreat of Cuban troops from Angola by Cold War inspired US policy,


28 As an introduction see: Sparks, A., Tomorrow is Another Country. The Inside Story of South
Africa's Negotiated Revolution, South Africa: Struik Book Distributors, 1994. Beinart, W.,
Twentieth Century South Africa, Oxford: OUP, 1994.


29 Venter, D., South Africa and the African comity of nations: from isolation to integration, Africa
Institute Research Paper, $n^{o}$ 56, Pretoria: Africa Institute of South Africa, 1993.


302


FOREIGN POLICY AND POLITICAL REGIME: THE CASE OF SOUTH AFRICA


the Namibian and the Angolan conflicts became intertwined politically
and diplomatically. During the major part of the 1980s, this linkage
served for South Africa as a convenient pretext to sabotage the Namibian
negotiations and to end its illegal occupation of the territory in
fulfillment of UN Resolution 435. The breakthrough came when the
Soviet Union and Cuba became prepared to negotiate the two conflicts
on the basis of the linkage. On 5th of August of 1988 the so-called
Geneva Protocol was signed, providing a ceasefire between South
African and Cuban troops in Angola and announcing the retreat of
South African troops from this territory. Finally, the New York
Agreement of December 1988 resolved the pending issues and paved
the way for the retreat of the two armies and free elections in Namibia
of November 1989, which were won overwhelmingly by the
Liberation Movement, SWAPO. Thus, from the South African
perspective, in March 1990 the Namibian equivalent of the ANC
took power in the former German colony, which was considered during
several decades South Africa's fifth province. 30


What caused this dramatic transformation of South Africa's
regional policy which found its major expression in the independence
of Namibia and the end of destabilization policy? Analysts point to an
ensemble of reasons, although they attribute different relative
importance to individual factors.31 The explanations centers on the
transformation of the international environment  the end of the Cold
War – and, as a consequence, the collapse of the ideological construction


30 For the Namibian conflict and its solution see: Pycroft, C, Angola - The Forgotten
Tragedy. Journal of Southern African Studies, vol. 20, $n^{\circ}2$, 1994, p. 241. Wood, B., Preventing
the Vacuum: Determinants of the Namibian Settlement. Journal of Southern African Studies,
vol. 17, $n^{0}:$, 1991. Hofmeier, R. (ed.), Afrika Jahrbuch (1987-1996). Politik, Wirtschaft und
Gesellschaft in Afrika südlich der Sahara, Opladen, Leske & Budrich, 1988-1997.
31 See among others: Wood, B., Preventing the Vacuum: Determinants of the Namibian
Settlement. In: Journal of Southern African Studies, vol. 17, $n^{\circ}$ 2, 1991. Hofmeier, R. (ed.);
op. cit., Marte, L. F.; op. cit., Tvedten, I., US policy toward Angola since 1975. Journal of
Modern African Studies, 30, 1, p. 31-52, 1992. Somerville, Keith, Foreign Military intervention
in Africa, London: Pinter, 1990. Wardrop, J., Continuity and change in South Africa and in
South Africa's relations with its neighbors. In: Bruce, R. D. (org.), Prospects for Peace: Changes
in the Indian Ocean Region, Perth, Indian Ocean Center for Peace Studies, 1992, p. 253-272.


303


WOLFGANG DÖPCKE


(the communist threat) which justified South African aggressions. The
Soviet "retreat from Africa seems to have preceded very much even
the definition of the domestic soviet situation. Even before
Gorbatchov's advent to power, it was felt, according to analysts, that
the involvement in Angola (as well as in Ethiopia) was no longer a
“low risk and low cost possibility to confront Western hegemony.
From 1985 onwards, Moscow increasing felt “the burdens of its
empire" and concluded that its African presence was to be sacrificed
for the achievement of higher priority goals. Already in spring of 1986,
Gorbatchov's "new thinking” would have reached Moscow's Africa
policy and the SU is thought to have indicated to the ANC the end of
the armed struggle and the favoring of a negotiated solution to the
South African domestic conflict. In 1987, Gorbatchov came to accept
the Namibian/Angolan linkage and by 1991 the military (and political)
presence in Africa of the Soviet Union was already negligible. 32


But regional factors (like the transposition of military power in
the South of Angola, the impact of the growing number of deaths of
white soldiers in this war, the public campaigns against conscription
among South African whites and the increasing costs of the war at a
time when South Africa submerged into an economic crisis, as well as
the lack of acceptance of the South African occupation among
Namibia's population) contributed also to the change in South Africa's
outlook. Decisive, from a military regional perspective, seems to have
been the impasse and the high South African losses during the battles
at Cuito Cuanavale in 1987-1988 (“South Africa's Stalingrad") and
the loss of aerial supremacy in southern Angola.33 While earlier South


32 Lefebvre, J.A., Moscow's Cold War and Post-Cold War Policies in Africa. In: Keller,
Edmond J. & Rothchild, D. (eds); Africa in the New International Order: Rethinking State
Sovereignty and Regional Security, Boulder, Col. & London: Lynne Rienner, 1996. Light, M.,
Moscow's Retreat from Africa. In: Hughes, A. (ed.); Marxism's Retreat from Africa, London:
Frank Cass, 1992. Grey, R.D., The Soviet Presence in Africa: an Analysis of Goals. In:
Journal of Modern African Studies, 1984, 22, 3.


33 Blight and Weiss cite an interview with Jorge Risquet, member of the Cuban Politbureau
and principal negotiator of the treaties with South Africa: "Cuito Cuanavale was decisive.
The negotiations came later. The battle of Stalingrad took place three years before the fall
of Berlin, but it was at Stalingrad that the outcome of World War II was decided. ... The


304


FOREIGN POLICY AND POLITICAL REGIME: THE CASE OF SOUTH AFRICA


African excursions into Angola during the 1980s were of very low
risk, the military engagements in 1987 and in the spring of 1988 show
a changed war and the limits of South African military power. Faced
with the weakening of the military option, with détente among the
superpowers and the threat of more severe sanctions, South Africa opted
for exchanging Namibia's independence for the retreat of Cuban troops,
a move in which neither South Africa nor Cuba would loose face.


The depreciation of the military option in Angola and Namibia
had important repercussions for domestic politics and the internal
decision-making process. Analysts observed a parallel realignment of
power and influence at the heart of the government, already perceptible
during the final phase of Botha's rule, which brought to the forefront
again the “doves and “diplomats” at the expense of the “securocrats”.
It seems that in terms of formulation of foreign policy the DFA,
advocating a more political and diplomatic approach, regained
preeminence. Parallel to the solution of the Namibian question,
President Botha started a new diplomatic initiative, visiting several
European and African countries. When, finally, F.W. de Klerk assumed
power in the National Party and in the State, he rapidly completed
this power shift and diminished drastically the influence of the State
Security Council and the security establishment on the government
decision-making process. 34


However, the solution of the Namibian conflict should not be
seen as an isolated incident, but rather as one element in a broad


South Africans realized that putting up a frontal battle in Southern Angola and Northern
Namibia would amount to the swan song of apartheid. So they decided to concede Namibia."
Blight, J. & Weiss, Th. G. (eds.), The Suffering Grass: Superpowers and Regional Conflict in
Southern Africa and the Caribbean, Boulder (Lynne Rienner) 1992: Conclusions: Must the
Grass Suffer? p. 161. See as well: O'Neill, K. & Munslow, B., Angola: Ending the Cold War
in Southern Africa. In: Furley, O. (org.), Conflict in Africa, London: Tauris, 1995, p. 183.
Ohlson, Th., The Cuito Cuanavale Syndrome: Revealing SADF Vulnerabilities, in: Moss,
G. & Obery, I. (orgs.): South African Review 5, p. 181, Johannesburg (Ravan) 1989. Gleijeses,
P., Conflicting Missions. Havana, Washington and Africa, 1959-1976. Chapel Hill, North
Carolina University Press, 2002.


34 Wardrop, J., Continuity and change in South Africa and in South Africa's relations with
its neighbours. In: Bruce, R. D. (org.); op. cit.


305


WOLFGANG DÖPCKE


paradigmatic reversal of South African foreign policy, denominated,
in the relevant literature as the rise of the “New Diplomacy”. This
"New Diplomacy”, which was born during the final year of Botha's
rule, gained much impetus during the transition period of de Klerk's
government between 1990 and 1994 and which finally mutated into
the main foreign policy orientation of the Government of Unityunder
the ANC, turned out to be one stringent link in foreign policy between
the apartheid and post-apartheid eras. 35 “New Diplomacy” represents
a dramatic foreign policy change still within the old regime, a change
which symbolizes continuity between the two regimes. The main
points of "New Diplomacy were publicly formulated in 1989 by
Neil van Herden, as General Director of the DFA, then the most
senior South African career Diplomat:


South Africa is part of the African community of nations;
African problems must be solved by Africans;
The use or support of violence for the promotion of


political objects is unacceptable;


Joint interest and responsibility in respect of the economic,
sociological and ecological welfare of southern Africa must be the
basis for co-operation and neigbourliness;


Southern African states are interdependent and their
future peace and stability are indivisible;


A regional conference for the promotion of joint interests
in southern Africa should be convened. 36


Evans agues that this “New Diplomacy” was not new at all and
that it represented more a change in style that in substance. The central
notion of South Africa as a hegemonic power in the regional context


35 This argument is based principally on: Evans, G., South Africa in Remission: the Foreign
Policy of an Altered State. Journal of Modern African Studies, 34, 2, p. 249-269, 1996. Vale,
P., South Africa's New Diplomacy. In: Moss, G. & Obery, I. (orgs.), South African Review 6.
From "Red Friday" to Codesa, Johannesburg: Ravan, 1992, p. 424.


36 Van Heerden, N.P., South Africa and Africa: The New Diplomacy. In: ISSUP Bulletin,
$n^{\circ}4$, p. 1-11, 1989, cited in: Venter, D., South Africa and the African comity of nations: from
isolation to integration, Africa Institute Research Paper, $n^{o}$ 56, Pretoria: Africa Institute of
South Africa, 1993.


306


FOREIGN POLICY AND POLITICAL REGIME: THE CASE OF SOUTH AFRICA


remained intact. Only the definition of hegemony shifted from
 geo-political to “geo-economic”.37 Venter stresses also the "geo-
economic" design of the new neo-realist diplomacy and argues that
this policy saw the region mainly as an object for South African
economic expansion. But “New Diplomacy did put an end to the
destabilization policy of the “Total Strategy”, at least as far as the
government was concerned. 38 From 1989 onwards, the South African
state rapidly dismissed violent coercive instruments in its regional policy.


The “New Diplomacy gained force with the lifting of the ban
against the anti-apartheid organizations, the freeing of Nelson Mandela
and the end of the State of Emergency in 1990. President de Klerk
and his Minister of Foreign Relations, “Pik” Botha, initiated a
diplomatic offensive with the declared objective to reintegrate South
Africa into the community of nations and to bring to an end the
economic sanctions against the country. By February 1991, the (still
white) South African diplomacy gained the initiative in respect to
sanctions. The “counter foreign policy” of the ANC, the Organization
of African Unity and the FLS, despite impressive public appearances
by Nelson Mandela, lost control over the sanction process. 39 Also, on
the African stage, the duo de Klerk/Botha obtained a series of
diplomatic successes, despite Nelson Mandela's determination to allow
the normalization of South Africa's foreign relations only after the
conclusion of the constitutional conference and free elections. In the
regional environment it was the severe drought of 1992 which, forcing
many states to accept South African food aid, helped de Klerk to break
the isolation.


Faced with the loss of control over the diplomatic process of
South Africa's international insertion, an issue which the ANC had


37 Evans, G. op. cit.


38 The continuation of support given to Unita and Renamo by sections of the security
establishment during the early 1990s suggests questions similar to those concerning the
internal situation: weather the state had a second, hidden agenda or weather the "dissident"
part of the military tried to realize their own objectives.


39 See: Hofmeier, R. (ed.), op. cit., The Financial Times, 7.5.1991: “On the road to normalization".
Die Welt (Hamburg), 17.4.1991: "Geteiltes Echo am Kap auf EG-Entscheidung".


307


WOLFGANG DÖPCKE


very successfully conquered during the 1970s and which allowed the
ANC to project itself as a “government-in-waiting”,40 the liberation
movement embarked on a major revision of its foreign policy, “bowed
to the inevitable [...] and began the process of policy convergence with
the New Diplomacy”.41 In a series of policy documents, the ANC
recognized the dramatic changes in the international society, the collapse
of its longtime ally, the Soviet Union, and the rise of a new multi- (or
uni-)polar international order under capitalist socio-economic
hegemony and dominated politically by the United States. The ANC
and government foreign policy declarations converged, and, finally, in
a key political document, in fact in its program of government (“Ready
to govern ) of 1992, the ANC adopted the language and central
concepts of "New Diplomacy". 42 Evans characterizes this as an  elite
pacting between the DFA of the white government and the ANC
Department of Foreign Affairs and argues that “by the time of the
elections in April 1994, in foreign policy terms at least, South Africa
had become more or less a unitary state actor. "43


V. POST-APARTHEID FOREIGN POLICY


But this “elite pacting and the continuities between de Klerk's
and Mandela's foreign policy, in the same way as the “neo-realist”
u-turn in domestic policy orientation, made by the ANC and the
South African Communist Party, did not remain uncontested. In terms


40 Evans, G., op. cit., Thomas, S., The Diplomacy of Liberation: the International Relations of the
African National Congress of South Africa, 1960-1985, London: 1995. Johnstone, A. und
Shezi, S.; The ANC's foreign policy. In: Johnstone, et. al. (orgs.); Constitution-Making in the
new South Africa, London: Leicester UP, 1993.


41 Evans, G., op. cit., p. 258.


42 African National Congress: Ready to Govern. ANC policy guidelines for a democratic South
Africa adopted at the National Conference (28-31.5.1992), 1992. African National Congress:
Foreign Policy in a New Democratic South Africa. A Discussion Paper (oct. 1993), 1993. African
National Congress: Discussion Paper: Foreign Policy Perspective in a Democratic South Africa
(dec. 1994), 1994. Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA), South African Foreign Policy,
Discussion Document, July 1996. DFA, Parliamentary Briefing, sept. 1997. DFA, Statement
on Nzo's Budget Speech, 7.5.1998.


43 Evans, G., op. cit., p. 259, 266.


308


FOREIGN POLICY AND POLITICAL REGIME: THE CASE OF SOUTH AFRICA


of public debate, the transition in foreign policy was far from a calm
one. For the first time in South Africa's post Second World War history,
foreign policy orientation turned into a publicly widely debated issue,
involving academics, civil society, the press, members of Parliament
and the very ANC and its political allies, in a free and inspired domestic
discussion context. In this lively debate, the DFA was criticized for
neither representing nor realizing a break with the past, neither in terms
of the Department's composition, nor in relation to the foreign policy
formulation (“elitist”, “without public control”). The foreign policy
of the new South Africa would simply accept the rules of the
international game, would not show moral leadership and would not
confront "global apartheid and “international capitalism". 44 In this
debate, distinct foreign policy traditions entered into confrontation,
within the ANC (for example between cadres who had acquired
political sensitivity within the country and those with an exile career)
or between the ANC and the traditional foreign policy establishment.45
In ideological terms, the dispute occurred between visions of an
opportunistic insertion into the international system, being guided by
pure economic advantages, accepting the rules and hierarchies of the
international order and those which were prepared to question these
rules and which proposed a foreign policy based on firm moral and
political principles. 46


The meeting of these distinct foreign policy traditions led, in
the long run, to the emergence of a new South African foreign policy
 identity", 47 which attempts to combine rather contradictory
ideological strands: a strong and sometimes even radical pan-africanist


44 Mail and Guardian, 9.6.1995: “Foreign Affairs Department under Fire”. Mail and Guardian,
8.9.1995: "The Realists in a Tussle with Radicals".


45 Hofmeier, R. (org.), op. cit., 1995.


46 Hofmeier, R. (org.), op. cit., 1995. Evans, G.; op. cit., Shubin, Vladimir; Flinging the Doors
Open: Foreign Policy of the New South Africa, CASA, Uni of Western Cape, Working Paper,
Bellville (CSAS) 1995. Calland, R. e Weld, D., Multilateralism, southern Africa and the
postmodern world: an exploratory essay, Bellville (University of the Western Cape, Centre for
Southern African Studies) 1994.


47 See: Cilliers, J., An Emerging South African Foreign Policy Identity? IGD, Occasional
Paper nº 39, april 1999.


309


WOLFGANG DÖPCKE


and  third-worldist discourse and rhetoric, a middle power
multilateralism, an explicit acceptance of the “new international agenda”
and an economic “neo-realism”, which searches, without any ideological
restraint, economic opportunities on a world and regional scale.


In the short run, this merging of distinct foreign policy
philosophies created much confusion and caused the international
prestige of the young state to suffer. Although, in general, the foreign
policy praxis was clearly dominated by the realist, pragmatic and
instrumentalist approach of the de facto Foreign Minister and Vice-
President Thabo Mbeki, the tensions between a normative idealism
on the one hand and the Realpolitik of the “New Diplomacy”, on the
other, created the lack of a single profile during the first few years of
South Africa's foreign policy. On the one hand, the search for economic
opportunities on the African continent, central element of the “New
Diplomacy", led to resurgence of South African economic hegemony
in the sub-region, which provoked much consternation and rejection.
On the other hand, politically and in terms of firm commitments,
the ANC government's policy of “low profile” caused much criticism
on the part of those countries, which had hoped that South Africa
would assume immediately a leadership role on the continent. The
OAU and the Tanzanian ex-President, J. Nyerere, uttered their
preoccupation that “(...) if South Africa continues to hide behind the
rhetoric of not wanting to play a leadership role, Africa would indeed
suspect a hidden agenda.”48 The DFA tried to explain this regional
political discretion as a reaction against military hegemony in the past:
“Perhaps, initially, because of our past experience and fear of being
accused of maintaining a Big Brother syndrome, we did not see
ourselves as playing a leading role in the region. Our perceived
reluctance to have a ‘hands on approach to our region and to be pro-
active in our continent has to some extent been viewed by our neighbors
and friends with some suspicion and a great deal of cautions.”49


48 The Star, Johannesburg, 1996, 25.9., “African renaissance can't remain romantic concept".
49 DFA: Background Document delivered by the MFA at the Parliamentary Media Briefing
Week, 11.2.1997


310


FOREIGN POLICY AND POLITICAL REGIME: THE CASE OF SOUTH AFRICA


But the striking contrast between a purposeful, aggressive
economic realism and the lack of political commitments remained.
President Mandela's own foreign policy initiatives only augmented
the perplexity of the observers. Without the country having developed
a well-founded policy vis-à-visinternational conflicts, Mandela surprised
the world with a series of sudden and spontaneous mediation attempts
(in the conflicts in Zaire, Sudan, East Timor and Nigeria), which all
failed, and a human rights initiative in the Nigerian case. Especially
the handling of human rights abuses by the Nigerian military regime,
oscillating between a high moral, non-realist radicalism and a abrupt
policy reversal caused some irritation in the international community. 50
On the world stage, Mandela tried to balance his policy between
excellent relations with the US and commitments to "old friends"
from the era of the armed and diplomatic struggle (Cuba, Iran and
Libya).51 But “neo-realist” opportunism did transcend also these
relations. Observers were perplexed by the apparent contrast between
a high moral rigor, expressed mainly by Mandela, and the sometimes
straightforward economic opportunism, demonstrated, for example,
in the case of arms exports or the question of diplomatic recognition
of the non-democratic, but economically attractive China (PRC) and
the dumping of democratic Taiwan, which had contributed substantially
to the ANC's election campaign.


However, it was in South Africa's regional policy, as like in no
other field of foreign policy, that the gap between declared principles
and political praxis was most pronounced. In respect to regional policies,
the ANC declarations were very straightforward and did not suffer
from an adaptation to the changing world order. They attributed
highest priorities to the sub-regional environment, whose societies,
according to the ANC, had suffered much in solidarity with the struggle
in South Africa: “The region [had] sustained us during the struggle


50 The East African (Nairobi), 4.8.97: “Big Shift as Mandela Warms up to Abacha". Frankfurter
Rundschau, 14.4.1996: "Ein Neuling, der in viele Fettnäpfchen tritt."


51 Financial Times (London), 3.10.1996: "Tricky balancing act. Policy makers are having to
contend with the legacy of apartheid and old friendships". Frankfurter Rundschau, 22.10.1997:
"Die USA suchten Mandela zu besänftigen".


311


WOLFGANG DÖPCKE


and our destiny is intertwined with the region; [...]. Southern Africa
is therefore a pillar upon which South Africa's foreign policy rests. ”52
Openly, the ANC and Nelson Mandela rejected hegemonic pretensions.
Being aware of the economic inequalities and asymmetries in the region,
the ANC declarations did not leave any doubt that the new government
intended a radical break with the “geo-economics” of the de Klerk era:
“A democratic South Africa should therefore explicitly renounce all
hegemonic ambitions in the region. It should resist all pressure to
become the 'regional power' at the expense of the rest of the
subcontinent; instead, it should seek to become part of a movement
to create a new form of economic interaction in Southern Africa based
on the principles of mutual benefit and interdependence. 53


After the end of apartheid Nelson Mandela made a great effort
to calm fears of a South African regional hegemony: “ [A] democratic
South Africa will ... resist any pressure or temptation to pursue its
own interests at the expense of the subcontinent. (...) any move
towards a common market or economic community must ensure that
industrial development in the entire region is not prejudiced. It is
essential therefore that a program to restructure regional economic
relations after apartheid be carefully calibrated to avoid exacerbating
inequalities. "54


But the praxis of South Africa's economic relations with its
neighbors turned out to be very different and did not mark a break
with the past. In fact, the new South Africa completed the "geo-
economics of the “New Diplomacy” of the de Klerk era without very
much taking into consideration the legitimate interests of its
neighboring countries.


Since the early 1990s, before the reintegration of South Africa
into the international and sub-regional community, trade between the
South Africa and the sub-region increased substantially, as a result of


52 ANC, Foreign Policy in a New Democratic South Africa. A Discussion Paper, out. 1993.
53 Ibid.


54 Nelson Mandela, South Africa's Future Foreign Policy. In: Foreign Affairs 72, nov.-dec.
1993,  . 91-2.


312


FOREIGN POLICY AND POLITICAL REGIME: THE CASE OF SOUTH AFRICA


general trade liberalization (enforced by pressures from Gatt/WTO
and the IMF) and of a systematic South African trade offensive, taking
advantage of the opening of these economies. During the years of
political and military confrontation, South African presence on the
sub-regional, non-SACU markets had been reduced substantially. Since
1981, South Africa's export to non-SACU countries in the region
declined in volume and value. 55 Zimbabwe for example, South Africa's
“natural market to the north, reduced its imports from South Africa
from 27% of all imports in 1981 to 19% in 1990 and its exports to
this country from 21% to 9%.56


Africa began to open its markets again for South African products
well before its democratic elections in 1994. The South African
economy, amidst a severe domestic economic crisis, long-term decline
of growth rates and official unemployment figures at around 35%,
responded with unprecedented vigour.57 Between 1987 and 1992
South African exports to Africa jumped from a 4% of all exports to
9,1%.58 Between 1992 and 1994 trade with Africa rose by another
50%, reaching \$2.5 billion.59 In 1995, 8% of all South African exports
(outside the SACU) went to SADC countries, growing at rates of
20% annually. 60 Prime destination of South African exports is
Zimbabwe, which assumes today for South Africa the same importance
of the West German market. South African imports to Zimbabwe
jumped from 19% of all imports of this country in 1990 to a staggering


55 Maasdorp, G.G., Squaring up to Economic Dominance: Regional Patterns. In: Rotberg,
R.I., et. al., South Africa and its Neighbors, p. 91, 1985.


56 Engel, U., The Foreign Policy of Zimbabwe, Hamburg: Institut für Afrikakunde, 1994,
p. 291.


57 For statistical evidence of the decline of South African growth rates in the period 1960-
1987, more marked after 1980, and its explanation, see: Kaplinsky, R., The Manufacturing
Sector. In: Maasdorp, G. and Whiteside, A., Towards a Post-Apartheid Future. Political and
Economic Relations in Southern Africa, London/Basingstoke: MacMillan, 1992, p. 83.
Unemployment: The Star, Johannesburg, 1996, 19.6.: “Unemployment resists feeble assaults”.
58 Financial Mail, Johannesburg, 1992, 28.8.: "Trade. New directions".


59 The East African, Nairobi, 1995, 24.7.: "S. African firms fill void as West turns elsewhere".
60 Piazolo, M., Südafrika, Wachstumsmotor der südlichen Afrika? In: Afrika Spektrum, 31,
Jg., $96/3$ Hamburg, 1996."


313


WOLFGANG DÖPCKE


38% in 1996, only counting official trade.61 South Africa entered as
well very successfully the Mozambican market. Between 1992 and
1993 South African exports to Mozambique surged by 42%, turning
that country into South Africa's second largest African trading partner
(after Zimbabwe) outside the SACU.62 But also outside the traditional
scope of activities in Southern Africa, South African business is rapidly
gaining ground. South African exports to African countries consist
mainly in manufactured products, important for the South African
economy due to their domestic linkages: thus a typical “colonial”
exchange relation is becoming visible between South African and the
rest of the continent.


The South African export upsurge is not accompanied by
reciprocity: South Africa continues to import very little from its African
trading partners. Until the end of the decade of the 1990s, South
Africa's conquest of African markets was so successful that the country
had a huge positive trade balance with every one of its African trading
partners, with the exception of oil-producing Nigeria, Gabon and
Egypt. 63 These huge trade deficits between South Africa and the region
are not exclusively the result of “pure economy” and South African
comparative advantage, but also the consequence of South African
economic policies, which combined export promotion up to the point
of subsidies (principally under the General Export Incentive Scheme)
with elements of market protection. 64 Southern African countries like
Zimbabwe saw their markets being “swamped” with South African
products whereas their own products are being excluded from the huge


61 Mail & Guardian, 1997, 23. – 29.5., "South Africa accused of bully-boy tactics in trade
with Zimbabwe."


62 The Business Herald, Harare, 1993, 3.6., “Pretoria seeks to boost trade with Mozambique".
The Star, Johannesburg, 1994, 24.11.: "Trade boom for SA goods". South African firms as
well gained a substantial portion of the aid funds entering Mozambique to assist the
reconstruction efforts. South African firms have won major contracts for road and bridge
construction, airport renovation and the elimination of land mines. It is not without a
certain irony that South Africa is profiting from the destruction that it had helped to cause
in Mozambique during the years of destabilization policy.


63 SCMB International Business Centers, 31.5.2000, website: mbeni.co.za.


64 See, for example: Muller, M., Some observations on South Africa's economic diplomacy
and the role of the Department of Foreign Affairs, IGD Occasional Paper, nº 27, oct. 2000.


314


FOREIGN POLICY AND POLITICAL REGIME: THE CASE OF SOUTH AFRICA


South African market. These conflicts culminated in what has been
styled as a “trade war” between South Africa and especially Zimbabwe,
which made some Zimbabweans proclaim that “President Nelson
Mandela is doing more to hurt them now than apartheid ever did”.65
South Africa's rather ruthless trade offensive and its tactics of market
protection, up to the point of delaying the implementation of the
SADC Trade Agreement, provoked much criticism. Zambia and
Zimbabwe raised the issue at the 12th SADC summit in 1996, where
South Africa came “under fire" as well from other SADC countries. 66
At this point, the European Community also voiced criticism of South
African policies, albeit light. 67


On the one hand, this economic neo-realism continues to
characterize today South African regional policies and represents a
striking continuity between the apartheid and post-apartheid eras. The
determined search for economic opportunities in a globalized world
economy represents now one dominant thread of South Africa's
international insertion. Globally, this finds its principal manifestation
in the conclusion of free trade agreements with the leading economies
(1999-2000 with the European Union, discussions with the United
States and even with China are under way), again without taking into
serious consideration the potential repercussions of these treaties for
the SACU and SADC countries. 68


On the other hand, towards the end of the 1990s South African
foreign policy seems to have overcome many of the deficiencies and
lack of definition which governed the first years of the ANC
government. The elements of this “emerging South African foreign
policy identity”, 69 which cannot be discussed here in detail, are:


1. Acceptance of the globalized, hierarchical international economic
order as a given reality and the search for a proactive, interest-guided


65 Mail & Guardian, Zim attacks SA on Trade policies, Johannesburg, 1996, 7.6.


66 The Sunday Mail, SA under fire at SADC conference, Harare, 1996, 4.2.


67 The Herald, Harare, View SADC with a soft heart, SA told, 1996, 5.6.


68 Weighing Pros and Cons of SA Free-Trade Strategy, Business Day, Johannesburg,
22.11.2002.


69 Cilliers, J., An Emerging South African Foreign Policy Identity? IGD Occasional Paper
$n^{\circ}$ 39, april 1999.


315


WOLFGANG DÖPCKE


insertion into this order, exploring existing opportunities. This strand
finds its expression in regional and global trade policies as well as in
South Africa's policies towards NEPAD, and in the economic aspects
of the African Renaissance philosophy.


2. A pan-africanist, “third-worldist” and even, sometimes, anti-
globalist discourse (and sometimes even a corresponding praxis), serving
South Africa's insertion in the African continent and the neutralizing
of domestic criticism. This posture finds some clear expressions, even
on the part of T. Mbeki, in the paradigmatic evolution of African
Renaissance and NEPAD.


3. A stringent middle-power multilateralism (similar to Brazil's
foreign policy posture), which insists on a rules-based international
system, national sovereignty, anti-hegemonic, emphasizing national
sovereignty and formal equality between states. South Africa's success
in the field of multilateral relations is impressive, and much more
convincing on a global scale than in the African context.


4. The plain acceptance of the “new international agenda and
its values like democracy, human rights, good governance, environmental
protection etc.


5. But the South African discourse and praxis for promoting
these values goes very much beyond an opportunistic appropriation
of hegemonic ideas. In contrast to the superpowers selective
instrumentalization of these values in order to cover up their imperial
interests and power politics, the South African commitment is much
more serious and profound and is linked to South Africa's domestic
environment and to the “lessons” that form the “struggle". South
Africa's “obligations”, arising from the anti-apartheid struggle, were
formulated by President Mbeki in the following way: “As much as
the rest of the world stood with us as we fought to end the system of
apartheid, [...] so we do have an obligation ourselves to contribute to
the construction of a better world for all humanity.” 70 The call that


70 President Thabo Mbeki in his State of the Nation Address before the National Assembly,
4 February 2000. In: Muller, M., Some observations on South Africa's economic diplomacy and
the role of the Department of Foreign Affairs, IGD Occasional Paper, nº 27, Oct. 2000.


316


FOREIGN POLICY AND POLITICAL REGIME: THE CASE OF SOUTH AFRICA


"domestic policy had to be translated into foreign policy”71 found its
condensation in the basic paradigmatic assumptions of African
Renaissance, which came to influence South African foreign policy
thinking from the second half of the 1990s onwards. Thus, the values
embodied in the “New South Africa (human rights and freedoms,
multi-party system and free elections, democratic and accountable
government, non-racialism and non-sexism, rule of law etc.) deeply
orient foreign policy thinking and praxis. 72


6. In relation to its "commitments" towards the African
continent, South Africa finally came to assume a more proactive posture
of leadership, much more in tune with its political and economic
potential than the discretion shown during the first years of democratic
rule. Under the name of NEPAD South Africa launched a continent-
wide, neo-liberal variant of African Renaissance, assumed a decisive
leadership in this scheme, constructed a power axis with Nigeria around
the issues of democracy and human rights, reached finally a consensus
of actively participating in peace missions on the continent and
displayed, accordingly, a very active rule in the Congo and Burundi
peace processes; it assumed, after an initial hesitation, a decisive active
role in the process of the transformation of the OAU into the African
Union from 2000 onwards. It seems that South Africa finally found a
stringent and genuine way of relating to the African continent with all
its problems; a political and moral approach which supplements the
economic realism of its foreign policy.


CONCLUSIONS


What conclusions can be drawn from this essay on the South
African foreign policy since the end of the Second World War? Does
the South African example show a stringent link between the character
of the regime and the pursuit of foreign policy? Did the regime change,


71 Jackie Selebi, Director General of the DFA, during 1999 conference on foreign policy
orientation, cited in: Muller, M.; op. cit.


72 Cilliers, J., op. cit.


317


WOLFGANG DÖPCKE


from the apartheid era to a new, democratic and non-racial South
Africa provoke a fundamental paradigmatic reorientation in the
country's foreign policy? Many scholars and observers would
unconditionally affirm such assumption, as it is argued by Olivier and
Geldenhuys:


For symbolic and political reasons, the South African foreign
policy continuum, which existed since autonomy from British
rule, had to come to an end with the accession of the new ANC
dominated Government of National Unity (GNU) in 1994.
The old regime's foreign policy and culture had to make way for
political legitimacy defined by the ANC's vastly different political
philosophy, external experience, constituency, and priorities. 73


Our own answer, though, is a little more complex. On the one
hand, there really was a clear break in foreign policy after 1994, and
especially since the second half of the 1990s, after the ANC-led
government was able to overcome a certain lack of orientation and
paradigmatic inconsistency in its foreign policy. Since the major
function of the apartheid regime's foreign policy was its own defense,
and “national interests” were defined in terms of white minority's
interests, it is in a certain way obvious that the new democratic and
non-racial regime defines very differently its foreign policy objectives
and instruments. To this we can add the impact of the changed
international and regional environment, which interacted with the
South African state.


On the other hand, there were significant policy changes during
the regime's existence, as well as the transcendence of the regime change
by continuities in foreign policy. The pursuit of “national interests”
(i.e. white sectional internets) did not lead to an uniform foreign policy
praxis, a far as regional policy is concerned. Rather, the regime was
faced with foreign policy options which varied from rapprochement


73 Gerrit Olivier & Deon Geldenhuys, South Africa's Foreign Policy: From Idealism to
Pragmatism. In: Business & the Contemporary World, vol. IX, $n^{\circ}$ 2, 1997, p. 365-6.
In: Muller, M.; op. cit.


318


FOREIGN POLICY AND POLITICAL REGIME: THE CASE OF SOUTH AFRICA


and détente to military aggression. The choice of specific policies
depended on the regime's reading of the global and regional
environments, their threats and opportunities, and the domestic
situation. The outcome was some significant policy shifts within the
same regime during the 50-old years of its existence. The second
challenge to an intimate and mechanical nexus between the nature of
the regime and foreign policy is posed by the existing continuities
between the apartheid and post-apartheid eras. This paper argues that
Pretoria's "New Diplomacy of the late 1980s and early 1990s already
embodied central elements of what would be New South Africa's
foreign policy. "New Diplomacy conditioned the new regime's
international insertion by pioneering a “neo-realist” economic thread,
which was only extended when the ANC took office. Did “New
Diplomacy" simply anticipate the regime change and did it design a
foreign policy which, under the old regime, did not have a chance of
being realized? Yes and No. In a certain way, the positive response to
the South African rapprochement by the African environment can
only be understood on the background of the more serious regime
change, which since 1990 became visible and credible. On the other
hand, the “neo-realist” economic vector of “New Diplomacy" is deeply
rooted in the South African historical experience and represents a
continuity of economic hegemony in the region, which predates even
the apartheid regime. This continuity shows that significant strands of
South Africa's foreign policy transcend the regime changes and form a
profound legacy, which no regime can ignore.


319


11


BRAZILIAN FOREIGN POLICY UNDER VARGAS,
1930-1945: A CASE OF REGIME TYPE IRRELEVANCE¹


Thomas E. Skidmore


The overarching goal of the project of which this paper is a part
is a reexamination of the idea that democratic political regimes are more
successful than their autocratic counterparts in responding to "the
opportunities and challenges of the international environment.” My paper
contributes to this reexamination by reviewing the links, or lack of them,
between regime type and foreign policy in Brazil between 1930 and
1945. This period in Brazil offers an interesting case study because it
covers several regime types – a provisional government (1930-33), a
constitutional republic (1934-37) and a personal dictatorship (1937-45).
The latter includes an opening of the system starting in 1943. This is
also the period in which Brazil was positioning itself in a world that
was heading toward and then engaging in the Second World War.


My conclusion, in a nutshell, is that the type of regime was not
a significant factor in the development or conduct of foreign policy in
Brazil during this period. The reason, in my view, is that most Brazilians
-as may not be surprising in an enormous, sparsely populated country
where most citizens lived far from its borders – did not consider foreign
policy issues important to their daily lives or well-being. They preferred
to think of Brazil as a world unto itself.


They were content, by and large, to delegate responsibility whether
consciously or otherwise, for foreign policy making to their head of
state and a few men gathered around him, bolstered by representation
from key ministries and the higher military. Nor did these men abuse
the trust placed in them, at least by the standards of the day. The major


1 I am indebted to Karina Saltman, Amanda Andersen, Alda Amaral and Nicole Bush for
research assistance and to Felicity Skidmore for her help, as always.


321


THOMAS E. SKIDMORE


thread throughout my story is their consistent use of foreign policy to
maximize Brazil's economic advantage, irrespective of the degree of
democracy in Brazil or the geopolitical specifics of the world stage.2


BEFORE VARGAS: THE ESTABLISHMENT OF AN ENDURING
FOREIGN POLICY CONSENSUS


Brazil became a Republic in 1889, when a loose coalition of
Republican politicians, Positivist intellectuals, and disgruntled Army
officers overthrew a monarchy that had ruled for almost seven decades.
The overthrow was not motivated primarily by foreign policy
considerations, but by an impatience, inter alia, with the country's
slow pace of modernization. 3


However, foreign policy objectives played at least a minor role
in the following sense.4 Among the components of the Republicans'


2 A note on sources is appropriate here. From 1930 to at least 1935, the press was relatively
free. It was during these years that key professional associations were formed in Brazil – The
Ordem dos Advogados do Brasil in 1930, The Academia de Medicina in 1931 and the
Ordem de Engenheiros e Arquitetos in 1933. See Randal Johnson, Literature, Culture and
Authoritarianism in Brazil, 1930-1945. In: Working Papers of the Latin American Program at
the Wilson Center, 1989. There is no evidence in any of the publications of these associations
of disagreement with Brazil's foreign policy. During the Estado Novo, there was certainly
censorship - and repression - of dissenting groups, but little evidence that groups sympathetic
to the Axis formed any significant part of the Brazilian public. Censorship collapsed by late
1943 and here again no significant foreign policy dissent emerged. It should be added that
this paper does not cover the South American border conflicts and wars in which Brazil was
normally only tangentially involved. For further detail see Amado Cervo and José Calvet de
Magalhães, Depois das Caravelas. Brasília: Editora Universidade de Brasília, 2000. The
Brazilian foreign policy's elite's principal concern within South America was Argentina,
which was consistently regarded as a serious rival, if not a potential enemy.


3 One of the clearest formulations of this impatience may be seen in Serzedelo Correia,
O Problema Econômico no Brasil. Brasília: Fundação Casa de Rui Barbosa, 1980. This book
was originally published in 1903. For an introduction to the "Old Republic (1889-1930),”
see Thomas E. Skidmore, Brazil: Five Centuries of Change. New York: Oxford UP, 1999.
4 An essential reference work on the history of Brazilian foreign policy is Amado Luiz Cervo
and Clodoaldo Bueno, História da Política Exterior do Brasil. São Paulo: Ática, 1992.
Also of value is the overview by Monica Hirst, History of Brazilian Diplomacy
(http://www.mre.gov.br/acs/diplomacia/ingles/h_diplom.) 27 Feb 2003. Readers should note
my paper neglects Brazil's relation with her South American neighbors. I have not found any
evidence in this literature on this subject that contradicts the thesis of my paper.


322


BRAZILIAN FOREIGN POLICY UNDER VARGAS, 1930-1945: A CASE OF REGIME TYPE IRRELEVANCE


ideology for change was the view that Brazil would never achieve a
position of economic power in the hemisphere as long as it retained
what they considered the medieval trappings of monarchy.


That this regime change occurred without a shot being fired
and was greeted largely with public indifference testifies to the decline
in the popularity of the monarch –now an ailing and largely invisible
old man. It was followed, however, by a decade of political instability
that threatened the very existence of Brazil as a single country and
postponed effectively any foreign policy initiatives.


The decade witnessed two major challenges to the new
government: one by monarchist interests, the other by regional
separatists. The former had some slight international flavor. A cabal
of monarchist rebels, including large elements of the navy, staged a
military rebellion against the vulnerable Republican regime. They
created enough disorder to alarm the U.S. investors in Brazil –not
the first or the last time U.S. investors have helped Latin American
governments in order to protect U.S. assets. These investors
dispatched a privately financed armada to Rio harbor, which was
used to help defeat the rebels.5


With the Republican regime safely in place by the end of the
century, the Foreign Ministry set about consolidating its international
boundaries, several of which (for example, with Bolivia and Peru)
had been contested. The conspicuous success of this initiative strongly
suggests that dropping the trappings of monarchy, if not actually
helping Brazil's image abroad, certainly did not hurt it. Baron Rio
Branco (Foreign Minister from 1902-1912) who virtually dominated
all foreign policy, was able, through extensive diplomatic efforts with
countries likely to be involved in the adjudication process, to achieve
boundary settlements that were in all cases decided in Brazil's
favor. He also pioneered the close U.S. – Brazilian alliance, which


5 Steven C. Topik. Trade and Gunboats, The United States and Brazil in the Age of Empire.
Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1996.


6 E. Bradford Burns. The Unwritten Alliance, Rio-Branco and Brazilian -American Relations.
New York: Columbia University Press, 1966.


323


THOMAS E. SKIDMORE


was to be the touchstone of Brazilian foreign policy for the rest of
the century.7


The rest of the pre-World War I period saw Brazil working to
assume the assertive international role the Republicans had envisioned
when they seized power in 1889. The first sign was military –a build-
up that included ultra-modern battleships. With the purchase of two
of these behemoths in 1904, Brazil had suddenly burst on the world
scene as a major naval power. 8 The Army, by contrast, was far weaker.
It was small, its equipment rudimentary, and its ammunition supply
unreliable. In 1922 the Brazilian army chief of staff, General Tasso
Fragoso, warned that his country's military weakness was encouraging
Argentina to enclose Brazil in a “circle of iron.” As a precaution Brazil
stationed one third of its entire army in the border state of Rio Grande
do Sul. Meanwhile the generals continued their plea for increased
budgets.


The second sign of Brazilian confidence was economic- coming
in the form of a monopolistic marketing scheme (1906) to maintain
the international price of coffee, Brazil's prime export. Although in
the very long run the scheme was self-defeating (the high prices
encouraged competing producers to enter the world market), for the
next half century it enabled Brazil to boost its coffee earnings well
beyond what a free market would have yielded.10 As we shall see, in
the 1930-45 era coffee market manipulation was once again an
important instrument of foreign economic policy.


7 A recent evaluation of Rio Branco's influence is given in Fernando de Mello Barreto, Os
Sucessores do Barão 1912-1964. São Paulo: Paz e Terra, 2001. This book also provides a
useful schematic history of Brazilian foreign policy.


8 Zach Morgan, Legacy of the Lash: Blacks and Corporal Punishment in the Brazilian Navy,
1860-1910. Ph.D. Dissertation, Brown University, 2001.


9 Stanley E. Hilton, Brazil and the Post-Versailles World: Elite Images and Foreign Policy
Strategy, 1919-1929, Journal of Latin American Studies, Volume 12, Issue 2, november
1980,  . 341-364.


10 Thomas H. Holloway, The Brazilian Coffee Valorization of 1906. Madison: The
State Historical Society of Wisconsin for The Department of History, University of
Wisconsin, 1975.


324


BRAZILIAN FOREIGN POLICY UNDER VARGAS, 1930-1945: A CASE OF REGIME TYPE IRRELEVANCE


There is no denying, however, that Brazil was facing an uphill
struggle in achieving its economic ambitions.11 In the words of one
modern analyst, the country faced “a very rapid increase in population,
bad social indicators, perverse income distribution, balance of payments
constraints, widespread government intervention, chronic inflation and
fiscal imbalances.” After 1900 the Brazilian government's main weapon
to promote growth was an “extremely high protection of domestic
industry against import competition.” It also intervened often in the
foreign exchange market to manipulate the value of Brazil's currency.
Thus, the development of Brazil's strategy to exploit the world
economy for its advantage had its origins in these decades before Vargas
achieved power.


The Great War brought Brazil's first direct involvement in the
European great power arena. 12 As befitted a minor power, Brazil
remained on the sidelines of the European conflict as long as possible,
a strategy later repeated when confronted with the rise of Nazism in
the 1930's. The end came in August 1917, when German submarines
began sinking Brazilian merchant ships along the Brazilian coast as
part of Germany's “unrestricted submarine warfare." After the loss of
a string of ships the Brazilian government, encouraged by outraged
public opinion (previously quiescent), declared war.13 Eager to promote
its international visibility, now that the chips were down, Rio made a


11 Marcelo Abreu and Dorte Verner, Long-Term Brazilian Economic Growth, 1930-94, Paris:
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, 1997, p. 21, 59. The external
context of Brazil's economic struggle in this era is analyzed in Winston Fritsch, External
Constraints on Economic Policy in Brazil, 1889-1930 Pittsburgh: The University of Pittsburgh
Press, 1988. For analysis of Brazilian economic history, especially industrialization, see
Werner Baer, The Brazilian Economy, Growth and Development. (5th ed.) Westport: Praeger,
2001, Warren Dean, The Industrialization of São Paulo, 1880-1945. Austin: The University
of Texas Press, 1969 and the chapters in Paulo Neuhaus (ed.) Economia Brasileira: Uma Visão
Histórica. Rio de Janeiro: Editora Campus Ltda., 1980. The overwhelming need to integrate
the national economy is stressed in Wilson Cano, Desequilíbrios Regionais e Concentração
Industrial no Brasil, 1930-1970. São Paulo: Editora Unicamp, 1985.


12 For an overall view, see Bill Albert, South America and the First World War: Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1988.


13 Even the German speakers in the three Southern states of Brazil, who were widely
assumed to favor the Kaiser, joined the voices advocating support of the Allies.


325


THOMAS E. SKIDMORE


token military commitment (a field hospital that, though modest,
was universally regarded as an effective contribution to the war effort)
in the war's last year. 14


There was nothing token about Brazil's bid for a major role at
the Versailles peace conference, however.15 Brazil's President, Artur
Bernardes, had great expectations for his country's role in the nascent
League of Nations. Earlier Bernardes had been outspoken in telling
Brazil's Congress of its two-front international obligation – to maintain
“great harmony of action in both America and Europe, where our
entry into war gave us a position of real distinction.”16 Confident of
Brazil's increased prestige, he instructed the Brazilian delegation in the
strongest possible terms to fight for one of the few permanent seats in
the League. Although in retrospect Bernardes was accused of poor
judgment, he had not misread the desire of many of his fellow
countrymen. São Paulo's liberal press, for example, was also projecting
a heroic role for Brazil in the postwar world. The editors saw that
there was in progress the “construction of a great power,” as “Brazil
becomes the equal of the most developed nations."17


It was not to be. Brazil's quixotic bid for a permanent seat went
down to defeat, primarily because of lack of support from Spanish
America. Bernardes embarrassed delegation quit the League for good
in 1926. Brazil's rejection by the diplomatic world would remain a
lesson in geopolitical overreaching for years to come. Brazil's desire
for enhanced international status remained a goal for the 1930s and
1940s, however, and would be reasserted strongly at war's end in 1945,


14 For a treatment of this subject, see Francisco Luiz Teixeira Vinhosa, O Brasil na Primeira
Guerra Mundial. (Rio de Janeiro: Instituto Histórico e Geográfico Brasileiro, 1990).
15 Stanley E. Hilton, Brazil and the Post-Versailles World: Elite Images and Foreign
Policy Strategy, 1919-1929. Journal of Latin American Studies, vol. 12, issue 2, november
1980.


16 Stanley E. Hilton, Brazil and the Post-Versailles World: Elite Images and Foreign Policy
Strategy, 1919-1929, Journal of Latin American Studies, vol. 12, issue 2, november 1980,
p. 352.


17 Cited in Maria Helena Capelato, Os Arautos do Liberalismo. São Paulo: Brasiliense, 1989,
p. 24.


326


BRAZILIAN FOREIGN POLICY UNDER VARGAS, 1930-1945: A CASE OF REGIME TYPE IRRELEVANCE


when it took a lead in the founding of the United Nations at San
Francisco. 18


The 1920's, a decade fraught with political and ideological
turmoil, brought major structural change to Brazil. On the level of
ideology, liberalism – the dominant political and economic doctrine
of the Empire and the early Republic – was now challenged by the
new ideologies of communism, corporatism and fascism, each of which
were to gain the spotlight in the 1930's.


As important as ideology was politics – a deepening split within
the national political elite. Since the late 1890's presidential elections
had been decided by consensus among the bosses of the major state
political machines. In the early 1900's that consensus broke down
amidst bitter inter-state rivalries. The climax came with the claimed
electoral victory of the “official” candidate in the presidential election
of 1930, which was immediately contested by an armed opposition
accusing the incumbent government of electoral fraud. The higher
military, fearing civil war, staged a “preemptive” coup in Rio. After
some hesitation, the governing military junta handed power to Getúlio
Vargas, the leader of the electoral coalition that had been declared the
loser. The “Revolution of 1930 had carried the day.


THE LANDSCAPE OF THE NEW VARGAS GOVERNMENT


For the next decade and a half Brazilian public life was dominated
by Getúlio Vargas. 19 Although in 1930 he had already been federal
Minister of Finance and Governor of Rio Grande do Sul, he was
relatively little known on the national or international scene. His
detractors then and thereafter called him “machiavellian,” “a chameleon,”


18 Once again, as had happened with the League of Nations, the Brazilians were hoping
their wartime participation would carry them to victory in their quest for a permanent seat
on the key policy making body of the new international organization, the Security Council
of the U.N. Mario Gibson Barboza, Na diplomacia o traço todo da vida. Rio de Janeiro:
Francisco Alves, 2002, p. 30-31. Once again they were disappointed.


19 For a succinct and highly insightful overview of this period, see Edgard Carone, Brasil:
Anos de Crise 1930-1945. São Paulo: Editora Ática, 1991.


327


THOMAS E. SKIDMORE


and "a sphinx.” All observers were struck by his deceptive passivity and
avoidance of commitment. His favorite motto was said to be "Let's
let matters lie and see how they turn out.” But behind the façade of
passivity lay a shrewd sense of timing, an uncanny ability to judge
people, and a fierce devotion to staying in power. 20 One should not
forget that soon after 1930 he centralized all significant police functions
and made them all directly report to him. 21


Upon reaching the presidential palace in November 1930,
Vargas' first task was to consolidate the revolutionaries hold on power.
Most essential was confirming Rio's (i.e. the national government's)
control of all the state political machines, several of which had opposed
the Vargas candidacy and his subsequent revolutionary movement.
Using his power as Provisional President, Vargas replaced every
incumbent state Governor except one (Minas Gerais) with an
“Interventor.” This strategy succeeded without struggle everywhere
except in São Paulo, the home state of the recently deposed president,
Washington Luiz. Opposition there to Vargas and the Rio government
simmered and finally exploded into a full-fledged military revolt in
July 1932, the minimum objective of which was to transform the
state of São Paulo into an independent entity. It should also be noted
that the rebels favored another losing cause: a return to the more
decentralized liberal economic policy that had prevailed before 1930.
Most of the federal army remained loyal to Rio, no other state
intervened, the Rio government emerged victorious in six weeks and
had no trouble in maintaining widespread diplomatic recognition as
the legitimate Brazilian regime. 22


20 There is no satisfactory biography of Vargas. An early, and therefore dated, attempt is
available in John W.F. Dulles, Vargas of Brazil. Austin: The University of Texas Press, 1967.
Vargas's personal diaries have proved a distinct disappointment as a source on his behavior:
Leda Soares (Ed.). Getúlio Vargas Diário: 1930-1936. Vol. 1, Rio de Janeiro: Fundação
Getúlio Vargas, 1995 and Getúlio Vargas Diário: 1937-1942. Vol. 2, Rio de Janeiro: Fundação
Getúlio Vargas, 1995. These volumes are not really diaries, but appointment books.
21 Vargas's growing control over the police is described in Elizabeth Cancelli, O Mundo da
Violência: A Polícia da Era Vargas. Brasília: Ed. UnB, 1994. Interestingly enough, Cancelli got
much of her information from the reports of U.S. diplomatic personnel back to Washington.
22 Stanley Hilton, 1932 A Guerra Civil Brasileira. Rio de Janeiro: Editora Nova Fronteira, 1982.


328


BRAZILIAN FOREIGN POLICY UNDER VARGAS, 1930-1945: A CASE OF REGIME TYPE IRRELEVANCE


In the early 1930's Brazil was struggling to rise above marginal
status on the world scene. It was an overwhelmingly rural society with
a largely illiterate population. The relatively small urban populace was
scattered among a string of largely coastal cities. Communication with
the interior was tenuous, hardly surprising since the entire country
had fewer than a thousand miles of paved highway. A single agricultural
export, coffee, furnished 70 percent of Brazil's foreign exchange
earnings, rendering the country vulnerable to price fluctuations in an
unstable world market. Its army, even in the opinion of its own officers,
was little better than third rate. The guiding challenges to foreign policy
making for this fragile nation were economic, and remained so for the
entire 1930-1945 period. Two were primary in 1930.


The first was to deal with the disastrous fall in foreign exchange
earnings that was hitting all trading nations, whether rich or poor. The
world price of coffee, like that of other primary goods, had been hit
hard. Brazil's export prices had fallen by almost 40% by 1930. This
had brought a punishing fall in the capacity to import finished goods,
whose prices had fallen much less sharply. This worsening of Brazil's
terms of trade further depressed the Brazilian economy, where
industrialization required imported capital goods. 23 The most obvious
way to gain the financing to industrialize its way out of the depression
was to expand the market for Brazilian exports. Since this was a crisis
faced by virtually every other economically ambitious developing nation,
it is fair to say that the crash of the world economy had produced a
much more internationally competitive economic environment. 24


The second economic challenge was a consequence of the first.
Given her declining export earnings, Brazil could not afford to make
the scheduled payments on her considerable foreign debt without
virtually liquidating her foreign exchange reserves.


23 Nathaniel H. Leff, The Brazilian Capital Goods Industry: 1929-1964. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, 1968.


24 The economic context for Vargas's entire career is analyzed in John D. Wirth, The Politics
of Brazilian Development: 1930-1954. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1970. An
indispensable analysis on this topic is Marcelo Abreu and Dorte Verner, Long-Term Brazilian
Economic Growth: 1930-94. Paris: The Development Center of the Organisation for Economic
Co-Operation and Development, 1997.


329


THOMAS E. SKIDMORE


BRAZIL AND THE COLLAPSE OF THE INTERNATIONAL
ECONOMY: 1930-1935


In fact, Brazil survived the early Depression years remarkably
well. Although her capacity to import averaged 30% below pre-1929
levels for the entire decade of the 1930's, industrial output declined
less than 10% from 1928 levels and had even risen 5% above that
level by 1933.Growth continued thereafter, with annual industrial
output up 7.9% and annual GDP up by 5.7%.25 Part of this success
was attributable to Brazil's ability to sustain a high import level of
capital goods which by1940 was only 15% less in quantity terms than
it had been at the end of the 1920s.26


Brazil's impressive (in contemporary terms) growth record
through the Depression was partly facilitated by the Vargas
government's shrewd handling of the foreign debt. Given the decline
in export earnings, having to pay off the foreign debt was a major
constraint on Brazilian economic growth because it meant forgoing
additional imports. In its first year the Vargas regime had already run
through its gold and foreign exchange reserves and incurred an
additional 6.5 million sterling pounds debt to the house of Rothschilds.
Continuing to service the debt on the existing schedule was clearly
impossible. Default was most unattractive since it would put Brazil
on the black list for future credit. With great skill Brazil played the
game of procrastination under the guise of negotiation.


First, it bought time in 1931 by negotiating a partial three-year
funding loan. Three years later it negotiated a complicated new
agreement that included reduced interest payments and postponement
of capital payments. This agreement (called the Aranha agreement after
Osvaldo Aranha, Finance Minister at the time) reduced the four-year
obligation (the longer term obligation remained on the books) to 33.6


25 Marcelo de Paiva Abreu, Argentina and Brazil during the 1930's: The Impact of British
and American International Policies. In: Latin America in the 1930's: The Role of the Periphery
in World Crisis, Oxford: St. Antony's College, 1984,  . 148-149.


26 Ibid, p. 151.


330


BRAZILIAN FOREIGN POLICY UNDER VARGAS, 1930-1945: A CASE OF REGIME TYPE IRRELEVANCE


million pounds sterling instead of 90.7 million.27 Consistent with
Brazil's developing relationship with the U.S., American creditors were
singled out for some concessions –to the fury of the British.


Exploiting trade relationships also helped Brazil's economic
fortunes. 28 The most important was Brazil's exploitation of the trade
rivalry between Germany and the United States. As already noted,
Brazil's principal trading relationship had shifted from Britain to the
United States before 1930. The latter was freely preaching to Latin
America the advantages of free trade. Brazil was less interested in lofty
principles (which usually benefited the Americans) than in maximizing
its foreign exchange earnings, and Germany offered that opportunity.


Starting in 1933 the new Nazi regime began its war-oriented
economic build up. For its trading partners, Germany offered a barter
system, whereby payment was made in “compensation marks (Aski
marks). This was a device for tying trade and thereby gaining economic
advantage for Germany. But it was also attractive to its trading partners
because the Germans set the Aski exchange rate lower than its exchange
rate for the mark on a cash basis. 29


Brazil was attractive to Germany for its supply of raw materials,
especially cotton, for which Germany now became a principal customer.
Brazil also supplied coffee (which was in oversupply in Brazil), leather
and tobacco. In return, Germany shipped the finished intermediate
goods Brazil needed for industrialization and the armament needed


27 Osvaldo Aranha was a loyal compatriot of Vargas throughout the 1930-1945 period.
They both came from Brazil's southern most state, Rio Grande do Sul. After serving as
Finance Minister, Aranha was subsequently Brazil's ambassador to the U.S. (1934-1937)
and Foreign Minister (1937-1944). There is a well documented biography in Stanley Hilton,
Oswaldo Aranha. Rio de Janeiro: Editora Objetiva, 1994.


28 Brazilian civilian industrialists, who were obviously a minority voice among the public in
the Vargas era, were often critical of what they saw as the Vargas government's excessive
attention to agrarian interests in its trade policy. A good example is Roberto Simonsen's
displeasure with Brazil's 1935 trade treaty with the United States. Marisa Saenz Leme, A
Ideologia dos Industriais Brasileiros, 1919-1945. Petrópolis: Vozes, 1978, p. 174-176.
29 There is a detailed analysis of the system in Stanley E. Hilton, Brazil and the Great Powers,
1930-1939. Austin: University of Texas Press, 1975. See also Ricardo Antonio Silva Seitenfus,
O Brasil De Getúlio Vargas: Formação Dos Blocos: 1930-1942. São Paulo: Companhia Editora
Nacional, 1985.


331


THOMAS E. SKIDMORE


for defending Brazil's borders. The latter was a longstanding goal of
the Brazilian generals, who remained intensely frustrated over their
lack of modern equipment, and were having no luck getting it from
the Americans. The particular beauty of the scheme from the Brazilian
vantage point was the alarm it generated in the United States, with
results to be described later on in my story.


ASSAULTS ON VARGAS FROM THE LEFT AND THE RIGHT, 1935-1937


In 1933, the members of Brazil's Constituent Assembly, which
had been duly elected by a free and fair democratic process, voted in
Vargas as President. They also drew up and ratified the Constitution
of 1934, which formalized Brazil as a democratic state. In less than
two years, Vargas' government was to face a revolt from the Communist
left, and two years later a revolt from the fascist Right. 30


At first sight it might appear that these revolts were intended to
change Brazil's foreign policy – the first in the direction of the Soviet
Union, the second in the direction of Nazi Germany or Fascist Italy.
In fact, however, both were motivated primarily by the desire to change
the social and economic structure of Brazil itself.


The revolt from the left had its seeds in a Brazilian popular
movement that included labor union members and had formed a
coalition, known as the Aliança Nacional Libertadora (ANL), which
gained moderate success in the 1934 Congressional elections.


As 1935 began, this coalition, now dominated by Communists,
picked up momentum and visibility with rallies, marches and
demonstrations. The Vargas regime, the higher military and the major
establishment newspapers all became alarmed at the prospect that this
leftist mobilization could destabilize the constitutional regime. In mid
1935 the Vargas regime, with wide popular support, pushed through
Congress a tough Law of National Security. This gave the government
emergency powers to muzzle, arrest and imprison the opposition. The


30 Marcelo de Paiva Abreu, p. 151.


332


BRAZILIAN FOREIGN POLICY UNDER VARGAS, 1930-1945: A CASE OF REGIME TYPE IRRELEVANCE


ANL was liquidated. But the world Communist movement,
headquartered in Moscow, had not given up. It had been monitoring
the developing nations for years for clues as to where the next Bolshevik-
directed revolution might be feasible, and several Comintern leaders
had already decided on Brazil as the leading prospect. A detailed plan
of action scheduled for late July 1935 was formulated in Moscow.
Money and forged documents were forthcoming, and non-Brazilian
agents were selected, briefed and infiltrated into Brazil. Although
Brazilian Communists, especially Luiz Carlos Prestes, the popular hero
of the "Prestes Column,” were incorporated into the planning, details
about the overall initiative, including the exact timing of the revolt,
were carefully held in Moscow. 31


The Comintern strategists based their optimistic analysis on the
supposedly deep penetration the Brazilian Communists had made in
their national army, especially among the lower ranks. Once in control
of the army, the Comintern reasoned, they could readily topple the
Vargas government.


Reality proved otherwise. In November 1935 the rebels launched
a series of ill-coordinated barracks revolts in Natal, Recife and Rio.
They were rapidly outnumbered and crushed. Apparently the army
commanders had been forewarned, perhaps through the offices of
British intelligence (although that was never confirmed). In any case,
the subsequent government crackdown liquidated what remained of
the left. The military were thoroughly purged, the foreign Comintern
agents arrested, and the Communist Party ranks hunted down,
incarcerated and in many cases tortured. Vargas could now further
consolidate his support among the higher army officers, who had reacted
strongly against the attempted subversion of their ranks. 32


31 For an early account, see Robert M. Levine, The Vargas Regime: The Critical Years 1934-
1938, New York and London: Columbia University Press, 1970.


32 The Communist revolt of 1935 has generated a large and growing historiography. This is
hardly surprising since the interpretation of these events, along with the history of the
Brazilian Communist Party, has great implications for our understanding of the left in
twentieth-century Brazil. For an overview of the revolt, see Stanley Hilton, A Rebelião


333


THOMAS E. SKIDMORE


Although Brazilian politics were changed as a result, in the sense
that every subsequent government seeking authoritarian control, even
after 1945, would point to the “Communist threat as justification,
this particular revolt did not lead to the end of democracy in Brazil.
That honor was reserved for the emerging threat from the
Brazilian right. The movement in question was the Integralists. They were
the declared enemies of the liberals, the Socialists and the Communists.
Owing their origin in large part to a post World War I Catholic
intellectual revival, their message was spiritual and Christian, as well as
nationalist, and exalted such values as family, tradition and hierarchy. 33


In the mid-1930s the Integralists emerged as a major
counterweight to the left, especially to the ANL. They were a paramilitary
organization with uniforms, military-style drills and a strict hierarchical
structure, and proved more than willing to confront the left in street
demonstrations and rallies. With their green shirts and their all-out
attack on traditional democracy, the Integralists were quickly dubbed,
especially by foreign observers, the "Fascists of Brazil. Their
pronouncements teamed with praise for Mussolini and his authoritarian
state. There was even a direct subsidy from the Italian government to
the Integralists. But here again, there can be little doubt that this dynamic


Vermelha. Rio de Janeiro: Editora Record, 1986 and Nelson Werneck Sodré, A Intentona
Comunista de 1935. Rio Grande do Sul: Mercado Aberto, 1986. The latter is by a long-time
Communist officer in the Brazilian army. Marly de A.G. Vianna, Revolucionários de 35. São
Paulo: Companhia das Letras, 1992, is an account highly favorable to Luiz Carlos Prestes.
For an account based on the Moscow archives, see William Waack, Camaradas. São Paulo:
Companhia das Letras, 1993. A useful collection of documents is included in Sodré, 1986.
The treatment that most effectively puts the revolt within the larger context of Brazilian-
Soviet relations is Stanley E. Hilton, Brazil and the Soviet Challenge, 1917-1947. Austin:
The University of Texas Press, 1991. The most balanced account of the domestic scene is
Paulo Sérgio Pinheiro, Estratégias da Ilusão. São Paulo: Companhia Das Letras, 1991, which
considers the entire ideological context of the left.


33 The best documented study remains Helgio Trindade, Integralismo, o Fascismo Brasileiro na
Década de 30. São Paulo: Difusão Européia do Livro, 1974. For monographic studies, see
René Gertz, O Fascismo, No Sul do Brasil. São Paulo: Editora Mercado Aberto Ltda., 1987
and Rosa Maria Feteiro Cavalari, Integralismo: Ideologia e Organização de um Partido de
Massa no Brasil (1932-1937). São Paulo: Editora da Universidade do Sagrado Coração,
1999. For one of the most comprehensive interpretations, see Stanley E. Hilton, O Brasil e
a Crise Internacional, 1930-1945. Rio de Janeiro: Civilização Brasileira, 1977, p. 23-57.


334


BRAZILIAN FOREIGN POLICY UNDER VARGAS, 1930-1945: A CASE OF REGIME TYPE IRRELEVANCE


right wing movement, with its strong following among military
officers and the elite in general, was committed primarily to economic
and social change within Brazil.


By 1936 the Integralists appeared very well situated, even
appealing to middle and upper class Brazilians. Vargas needed these
groups to support his anti-Communist regime and gave the Integralists
the impression at least that he was sympathetic to their aims. Their
leader, Plinio Salgado, fully expected to be named to a high
governmental position.34 But the higher military were suspicious of
the ultimate impact of Integralism on Brazil and the political center
was divided. Working closely with the military, Vargas staged his own
preemptive coup. On November 10, 1937 he closed the Congress,
discarded the Constitution of 1934 and unilaterally promulgated a
new authoritarian Constitution. The Estado Novo was the result and
the Integralists were to be given no part in it. 35


Some of their party faithful lost patience and in early 1938 tried
their own coup with an unsuccessful armed attack on the presidential
palace. The attackers were arrested, the Integralists outlawed, and their
organization forcibly disbanded.


The story of Vargas and the Integralists is particularly interesting
as an example of how domestic and foreign policy did (or did not)
interact in Vargas's Brazil. At the same time Vargas was outmaneuvering
the fascist element on the domestic scene, he was actually growing


34 Since he had a solid Paulista electoral following, he could well have assumed that Vargas
would welcome his presence in a governing coalition.


35 The leading overviews of the Estado Novo, such as Jens R. Hentschke Estado Novo:
Genesis und Konsolidierung der brasilianischen Diktatur von 1937. Saarbrüken: Verlag für
Entwicklungspolitik, 1996 and Karl Loewenstein, Brazil Under Vargas. New York: Macmillan,
1942, devote virtually no coverage to the international relations of Brazil in this era. The
same is true of the following treatments: Aspasia Camargo, Dulce Chaves Pandolfi, Eduardo
Rodrigues Gomes, Maria Celina Soares D'Araujo and Mario Grynszpan, O Golpe Silencioso.
Rio de Janeiro: Rio Fundo, 1989. Lucia Lippi Oliveira, Monica Pimenta Velloso and
Angela Maria Castro Gomes, Estado Novo. Rio de Janeiro: Zahar Editores, 1982, Dulce
Pandolfi, Repensando o Estado Novo. Rio de Janeiro: Editora FGV, 1999 and Simon
Schwartzman, Helena Maria Bousquet Bohemy and Vanda Maria Ribeiro Costa, Tempos de
Capanema. São Paulo: Paz e Terra, 1984. The Pandolfi book is a collection of individually
authored chapters. Boris Fausto's chapter on the international context is afforded only four
pages in this 345-page book.


335


THOMAS E. SKIDMORE


closer to Germany for economic reasons. The Aski mark system
mentioned earlier reached its height over the 1936-38 period, exactly
the period when Integralist terror reached its maximum operation with
Brazil. Yet this economic link with Germany had no impact on how
Vargas dealt with the Integralists. 36


It did alarm the United States, however. The economic reasons
for this alarm were straightforward. First, Brazil's action directly
repudiated the free trade principle that the American Secretary of State,
Cordell Hull, was avidly advocating and on which the Americans were
basing their own trade policy. 37 Second, it meant loss of an important
part of the Brazilian market for American exporters. But there was
probably an element of geopolitical concern as well, given the rising
tensions between Nazi Germany and the rest of Europe and Vargas's
bland dismissal of the motives behind the coup that established his
Estado Novo (that history had rendered democracy “obsolete ). 38


Vargas reacted to Washington's concern in his usual pragmatic
way, which was spectacularly successful in this instance. He dispatched
his passionately pro-American Foreign Secretary, Osvaldo Aranha, on
a diplomatic mission of reassurance. He was to sell the Estado Novo as
merely a local response to political realities. 39


36 There has been considerable controversy over the degree of official anti-semitism in the
Vargas era. Aside from Gustavo Barroso, the Integralist movement seemed relatively free of
systematic anti-semitism. The federal government, especially in its immigration policy, was
another matter, as Maria Luiza Tucci Carneiro argues (and documents). In: O Anti-semitismo
na Era Vargas: fantasmas de uma geração. São Paulo: Brasiliense, 1988. For follow-up research
by the same author see Ronaldo Franca, Preconceito Oficial. Veja. 22 March 2000. Jeffrey
Lesser, based on a different interpretation of the documents, has contested Tucci Carneiro's
argument. Lesser, O Brasil e a Questão Judaica: Imigração, Diplomacia e Preconceito. Rio de
Janeiro: Imago, 1995.


37 This was also the era of the Good Neighbor Policy which was, as one scholar aptly noted,
"nothing more than an expression of the traditional, legal rights of states to respect for their
sovereignty and national borders – something the United States had glorified in principle
and violated in practice since its founding as a republic." Elizabeth A. Cobbs, The Rich
Neighbor Policy: Rockefeller and Kaiser in Brazil. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1992, p. 35.
38 This is well treated in Ricardo Antonio Silva Seitenfus, O Brasil de Getúlio Vargas e a
Formação dos Blocos: 1930-1942. São Paulo: Companhia Editora Nacional, 1985.


39 Aranha had to do a quick remake of his previously pro-democracy rhetoric. The change
can be seen in his collected speeches. Oswaldo Aranha, 1894-1960: Discursos e Conferênicas.
Brasília: Fundação Alexandre Gusmão, 1994.


336


BRAZILIAN FOREIGN POLICY UNDER VARGAS, 1930-1945: A CASE OF REGIME TYPE IRRELEVANCE


The U.S. was in a weak position to retaliate economically, since
Brazil was their sole supplier of coffee. So it chose to use the carrot
rather than the stick in its efforts to weaken Brazil's links with Germany.
Washington volunteered help with current Brazilian financial priorities,
such as creation of a central bank, and did not voice any geopolitical
concerns that it might have had. The Aski mark trade link continued,
albeit at a reduced level, until the European war stopped all Germany's
transatlantic commerce in 1940.


Brazil was also able to exploit the political tensions that
culminated in the Estado Novo to wiggle out of the 1933 debt
renegotiation agreement, which had committed Brazil to a four-year
debt repayment schedule of its foreign debt. In November 1937, at
the same time as the coup, Vargas simply announced a three-year
unilateral default. His excuse was that Brazil could not both pay on
the debt and finance the imports it needed for modernizing the railway
system and rearming its military needed to protect its borders. In 1943,
with wartime exports swelling the coffers, Brazil finally agreed on the
repayment of its American and British debts. By this point the Vargas
government had gained great economic advantage by successfully
postponing payment for what amounted to a decade and being able,
in the end, to discount part of the value of the remaining debt
obligations. This all helped conserve foreign exchange, which, once
again, could be used to finance imports for Brazilian development. It
was diplomacy in the service of economic nationalism.40


NEGOTIATING FOR ADVANTAGE IN THE GATHERING STORM, 1939-1945


As the decade of the 1930s drew to a close, the territorial
expansion goals of both Hitler's Germany and Mussolini's Italy became


40 Marcelo de Paiva Abreu, Brazilian Public Foreign Debt Policy, 1931-1943, Brazilian
Economic Studies 4, Rio de Janeiro: IDEA, INDES, 1978, p. 105-140. For detailed evidence
on Vargas's and the higher military's commitment to industrialization, see Stanely E. Hilton,
Vargas and Brazilian Economic Development, 1930-1945: A Reappraisal of his Attitude
Toward Industrialization and Planning, Journal of Economic History, vol. 35, issue 4, december
1975, p. 754-778 and "Military Influence on Brazilian Economic Policy, 1930-1945: a Different
View," The Hispanic American Historical Review, vol. 53, issue 1, february 1973, p. 71-94.


337


THOMAS E. SKIDMORE


even clearer and began explicitly to include increasing their influence
in Brazil. This aim was certainly plausible, given the large Brazilian
communities of immigrants from the two countries. Vargas showed
no hesitation in using surveillance, and repression when necessary, to
keep the foreign-language speaking Brazilian communities under
control. At the same time, however, he continued trading with Germany
while still cultivating the United States. 41


Strongly isolationist sentiment in the U.S. had given Brazil cover
to maintain a stance of neutrality, even as Hitler's war spilled over into
North Africa, the Middle East, and east toward the Soviet Union. 42


What finally made the difference was Japan's surprise attack on
Pearl Harbor in December 1941 and Hitler's reaction to it. United
States public opinion turned around in a matter of hours, as America
immediately declared war on Japan. Perhaps Brazil would have
maintained its neutrality a while longer, if Hitler had not, in a
precipitous and ultimately disastrous gesture, declared war on
America. 43 Even Vargas could see the time for ambiguity was past. In
late January 1942 Brazil broke off relations with Germany and in
August declared war, joining the Allied side.


Thus began a three-year period of close wartime collaboration
between Brazil and the United States. 44 With the Brazilian Air Ministry
barely a year old, the U.S. immediately moved in to take over the


41 This process is thoroughly documented in Stanley E. Hilton, Hitler's Secret War in South
America, 1939-1945. Baton Rouge and London: Louisiana State University Press, 1981
and his Suastica Sobre o Brasil. Rio de Janeiro: Editora Civilização Brasileira, 1977.
42 The finest overall interpretation of this period is R.A. Humphreys, Latin America and the
Second World War: 1939-1942. London: The Athlone Press, 1981 and his Latin America and
the Second World War: 1942-1945. London: The Athlone Press, 1982.


43 There was a probability that Germany was going to declare war on the United States. But
the timing was crucial. Ian Kershaw, Hitler 1936-1945: Nemesis. New York: Norton, 2000,
p. 444-46.


44 The premier source remains Frank D. McCann Jr., The Brazilian-American Alliance
1937-1945. Princeton: The Princeton University Press, 1973. For an interpretation of
U.S.-Brazilian relations which is more critical of the U.S. see Moniz Bandeira, Presença dos
Estados Unidos no Brasil. Rio de Janeiro: Civilização Brasileira, 1973. The American political
scientist Lars Schoultz has given a blistering critique of U.S. Latin American policy, Beneath
the United States, A History of US Policy Toward Latin America. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press, 1998.


338


BRAZILIAN FOREIGN POLICY UNDER VARGAS, 1930-1945: A CASE OF REGIME TYPE IRRELEVANCE


training of Brazilian pilots and soon began furnishing hundreds of
planes under the lend lease act. There followed a flood of other military
equipment from the U.S. The U.S. also furnished financing for a
national steel plant which was later constructed at Volta Redonda.


By 1943 the tide in Europe had begun to turn strongly in favor
of the allies. In 1944, determined to be identified clearly with the
winners, Brazil sent a combat division (upwards of 20,000 men) to
fight alongside the American $5^{th}$ Army in Northern Italy. 45 What was
the shape of Brazil's international profile in 1945 compared with pre-
1930. Above all, it was a shift of focus from Europe to the U.S. Britain
had definitively lost its role as Brazil's leading trade partner. France
had lost its dominance in Brazilian culture. Germany had lost its role
as a key supplier of capital goods. In 1945 the overwhelming foreign
presence in Brazil belonged to Uncle Sam.


And the winds of political change in Brazil were consistent with
this reality. Vargas's authoritarian stance had been rendered obsolete
by the Axis reversals on the battlefields of Europe and Vargas recognized
that. As rumblings of opposition began to leak out, for example in
the Minas Gerais Manifesto as early as 1943, Vargas was himself
encouraging dialogue with political leaders he saw emerging. 46 The
model that particularly impressed Vargas was the British Labor Party,
because it had successfully combined trade union support with a
commitment to democratic socialism.


45 McCann has provided several accounts: Frank D. McCann Jr. The Brazilian-American
Alliance 1937-1945. Princeton: The Princeton University Press, 1973 and his "The Força
Expedicionária Brasileira in the Italian Campaign, 1944-1945". Paper for Conference of
Army Historians sponsored by the US Army Center for Military History. Washington D.C.:
University of New Hampshire, Department of History. June 9, 1992. For a Brazilian
account, see William Waack, As Duas Faces da Glória. Rio de Janeiro: Editora Nova Fronteira,
1985. Vargas's view of this adventure of sending troops to Europe paralleled the earlier
hopes that participation in WWI would greatly enhance Brazil's international image. In
1943 he predicted that "Brazilians would be the most numerous representatives of Latin
culture among the victorious nations." Humphreys, Latin America and the Second World
War, 1942-1945. р. 79.


46 Here Vargas was revealing a flexibility and pragmatism that differentiated him from the
"typical" Latin American dictator and led to his successful campaign to become Brazil's
democratically-elected President in 1951.


339


THOMAS E. SKIDMORE


So did the Liberals, who had lost in 1930 and who now saw
their chance to return to power. One of their leaders, Virgilio de Melo
Franco, gave a press interview in February 1945 in which he said on
the foreign policy to come: “Penso que devemos seguir nos rumos
invariáveis das tradições do Itamaraty (the Brazilian Foreign Ministry)
máxime pelas diretrizes confirmadas nos últimos tempos...” Vargas's
problem was that the military did not trust him when he expressed his
commitment to holding open elections and abiding by the result. They
had their own plans for a return to democratic Brazil.47 The same
generals who had been key to the success of Vargas's coup in 1937
ousted him from power in 1945 and presided over the election of a
new Constituent Assembly in 1946, which reconstructed the basis of
a liberal democracy. In this, the generals voted with the public, and
the objectives, as always with regime change in Brazil, were primarily
domestic. 48


47 Virgilio de Melo Franco, A Campanha da U.D.N. (1944-1945). Rio de Janeiro: Livraria
Editora Zelio Valverde S.A., 1946, p. 135. The assumption of continuity from the Estado
Novo is striking. In one authoritative account of the politics surrounding the fall of Vargas
the description of the political debates on Brazil's future includes virtually no discussion of
foreign policy. John D. French, The Populist Gamble of Getúlio Vargas in 1945. In: David
Rock (Ed.), Latin American in the 1940's. Berkeley: University of CA Press, 1994,
p. 141-165.


48 For a close study of the U.S. Ambassador's role in the fall of Vargas, see Stanley Hilton,
O Ditador & o Embaixador. Rio de Janeiro: Editora Record, 1987.


340


12


POLITICAL REGIMES AND BRAZIL'S FOREIGN POLICY


Amado Luiz Cervo


INTRODUCTION


This study examines the relation between political regimes and
foreign policy as part of the Brazilian historical experience.
Furthermore, it focuses on connections between the nature of the
regime and foreign policy. The hypothesis which guides the
interpretation of the Brazilian historical experience can be formulated
as follows: the change of foreign policy and of the “model” of
international insertion occurs under the influence of specific factors,
which may be related, or not, to the change of regimes or to the
succession of governments within the same regime.


Two initial observations allow for a better comprehension of
this hypothesis.


Firstly, in the Brazilian historical experience political
transformations sometimes did not lead immediately to changes in
foreign policy. This lack of change characterizes the Revolution of
1930, the implementation of the Estado Novo in 1937 and the
re-democratization in 1985. An abrupt attempt to adapt the foreign
policy to the new regime provoked sometimes a rapid return to former
parameters. This occurred in the case of the “republicanization of the
foreign policy in 1889, during the recovery of the tendencies of the
imperial diplomacy by Barão do Rio Branco in 1902, as result of the
“occidentalization” or “americanization”, attempted by Eurico Gaspar
Dutra in 1945. Other examples are the return to the nationalist
parameters of the Vargas' era (1930-1945) since 1947, the liberal
pro-Occident "correction of routes” of Castelo Branco in 1964 and
the recovery of the principles of the Independent Foreign Policy
(1961-1964) by the military regime since 1967.


341


AMADO LUIZ CERVO


Secondly, Brazil's international insertion experienced changes of
orientation within the same political regime. During the so-called Old
Republic (1889-1930) there was an inflection of the foreign policy
related to the perception of Brazilian interests. Such interests became
more universal during the administration of Barão do Rio Branco,
between 1902 and 1912, than they had been under the aegis of the
Jacobin Republic implemented in 1889. The military government
(between 1964 and 1985) gave a strong demonstration of change within
the regime, when it recovered, between 1967 and 1985, the tendencies
of national development of former presidents Vargas, Kubitschek,
Quadros and Goulart (1951-1964). José Sarney's ascension to power
in 1985 and the continuity of the democratic regime until the present
day did not prevent a radical rupture in the concepts and orientations
of Brazil's international insertion during the government of Fernando
Henrique Cardoso (1994-2002).


Do these two observations allow the conclusion that medium
and long-term tendencies prevail in the link between political regime
and foreign policy? Is it possible to argue that there are factors, which
have more influence over the foreign policy and the international
insertion of Brazil than the succession and the nature of regimes,
governments or political parties in power?


When regimes change, men in command are being replaced to
greater degree than in the case of government changes within the same
regime. However, there are variables which are independent of these
factors and influence in depth the model of international insertion.
Some of these variables, to be considered in this study, are: national
identity, cultural identity, capacity of establishing internal consensus,
degree of rationality in the management of the State's policy, existence,
or not, of a national project, conflictive or cooperative relations of
groups and social forces, autonomy of decision or subservience of the
statesmen, resignation to external conditioning or national will.


The theme of this paper will be approached by two methods of
analysis. We adopt, firstly, the multiple causes analysis of international
relations, proposed by Jean-Baptiste Durosselle in his historically based


342


POLITICAL REGIMES AND BRAZIL'S FOREIGN POLICY


theory of international relations.¹ To interpret the Brazilian experience
we work with the concept of national identity, recently elaborated by
Celso Lafer with the aim of explaining continuity and change in Brazil's
foreign policy. After concluding this first part of the study, we apply
the method of paradigmatic analysis, developed in our works on foreign
policies and international relations of Brazil and other South America
countries. Furthermore, the Brazilian case will be compared to
Argentine's historical experience.


The paradigm of multiple causes in international relations is a
well-known method of analysis, and it does not require here a
conceptual elaboration.4 Paradigmatic analysis, which we have applied
to the interpretation of the international relations in the South
American region, will be explained in the second part of this paper.


A) THE MULTIPLE CAUSES ANALYSIS APPLIED TO BRAZIL'S FOREIGN POLICY


The French school of international relations seems to propose a
“detachment” of contemporary international relations from political
regimes, suggesting to the analyst the identification and the pondering
of four great variables of international life: profound forces, the aims
of politics, the components and the movement both of the forces and
of diplomacy. This model of interpretation situates the regime on the
side of foreign policy, conceived by the statesmen. To this effect, leaders


1 Duroselle, Jean-Baptiste. Tout empire périra. Théorie des relations internacionales. Paris:
Armand Colin, 1992. Translated into Portuguese: Todo império perecerá. Teoria das relações
internacionais. Brasília: EdUnB, 2000.


2 Lafer, Celso. A identidade internacional do Brasil e a política externa brasileira: passado, presente
e futuro. São Paulo: Perspectiva, 2001.


3 Cervo, Amado Luiz. Relações internacionais da América Latina: velhos e novos paradigmas.
Brasília: IBRI, 2001. Cervo, Amado Luiz & Bueno, Clodoaldo. História da Política Exterior
do Brasil. Brasília: EdUnB, 2002. Cervo Amado Luiz. Sob o signo neoliberal: as relações
internacionais da América Latina. Revista Brasileira de Política Internacional, $n^{\circ}$ 43 v. 2,
p. 5-27, 2000. Ibidem, Relações internacionais do Brasil: um balanço da era Cardoso,
$n^{\circ}$ 45, v. 1, p. 5-35, 2002.


4 Cervo, Amado Luiz. History of International Relations. International Encyclopedia of the
Social & Behavioral Sciences, Oxford, 2002, p. 7824-7829.


343


AMADO LUIZ CERVO


interpret forces according to their perception of interests, and take
external decisions, engendering a policy. The regime is related to the
qualities of the statesman in charge as well as to the institutional and
operational dimension – instruments or mechanisms of action – that
are available to implement such policy.


For the study of the Brazilian case, the literature suggests the
concept of national identity as an instrumental category of analysis
appropriate to unveil historically the multiple causes game. According
to Celso Lafer, the Brazilian identity, as an explaining category of
tendencies and changes in foreign policy, consists of five components:
the historical legacy, the context of neighborhood, the asymmetrical
insertion of a medium power, the development vector in the objectives
of foreign policy and the process of external opening since 1990.


These components certainly are not object of this study, but we
must take them into consideration, because, at first sight, they minimize
the role of the political regime in the Brazilian foreign policy. But in
which way?


There has already been established a direct relation between the
Brazilian national identity – determined by the multi-ethnical and
multi-cultural character of the society, as well as by her social-economic
inequalities and heterogeneity – and the historical legacy of the Brazilian
diplomacy, characterized as universalistic and contrary to any kind of
segregation, as cooperative and opposed to confrontation, as pacifistic
and oriented to the coexistence of differences, and as directed to juridical
solutions, recognizing the rule of international law. These parameters
of behavior suffered few changes with the succession of different
regimes and governments. They create the perception of a contented
country, rendering credits of sympathy and benevolence in international
relations. 5


5 See a colective work we have organized: O desafio internacional, a política exterior do Brasil
de 1930 a nossos dias, Brasília: EdUnB, 1994, p. 25-31. See furthermore Amado Luiz Cervo
and José Flávio Sombra Saraiva studies in Savard, Pierre e Vigezzi, Brunello (ed.),
Multiculturalism and the history of internacional relations from the 18th Century up to the present,
Milano: Edizioni Unicopli, 1999, p. 291 and 337.


344


POLITICAL REGIMES AND BRAZIL'S FOREIGN POLICY


The regional environment was important in the genesis of
the Brazilian national identity and in the conduct of its foreign
policy. However, the Brazilian case differs from many others as far
as the impact of the entourage of the national identity is concerned.
During the Regency period (1831-1840), when the Brazilian
national state was consolidated, as well as and during the Second
Reign (1840-1889), the Brazilian monarchy made great efforts to
shape and secure the state's territory  removing threats to its
integrity and delimitating its boundaries through agreements with
the neighboring countries. Until about 1860, the image of a
neighborhood of badly managed States contributed to generate a
self-image of Brazil as a country equipped with civilized institutions.
Argentina only got a positive image after the ascension to power of
Bartolomeo Mitre, in the 1860s. These images of oneself and the
other were transferred from the monarchic to the republican
diplomacy and were deepened during the term of office of Barão
do Rio Branco, between 1902 and 1912. Thus, the idea of
superiority of force and civilization in relation to Brazil's neighbors
was strengthened. These neighbors, it was concluded, should be
well treated, especially because they were of little significance to
Brazil's national life. This is the so-called official cordiality, which
has been cultivated until the present day as a parameter of the
Brazilian diplomatic behavior towards its neighbors.


Monarchists and republicans, democratic and military
presidents, nationalistic and liberals: all of them emphasized, with
notable continuity, the discourse and practice of official cordiality.
Of course, there were moments in which Statesmen were inclined
to break with this standard of behavior in the relations with Argentine.
This occurred for a brief period at the end of the 1970s – during the
office of Ernesto Geisel and his Chancellor, Azeredo da Silveira
because of the litigation concerning the utilization of the rivers of
the River Plate Basin. Or still during the diplomacy of obstruction,
practiced by the Brazilian chancellors between 1945 and 1956,
particularly by João Neves da Fontoura, who saw the rapprochement


345


AMADO LUIZ CERVO


with the Peronist regime as a threat to Brazil's special relations with
the United States. 6


The Brazilian foreign policy is one of the reasons for asymmetrical
insertion of the country in the capitalist world economy. It contributed
to engender and maintain this type of insertion until the Revolution
of 1930. Since then, the foreign policy inverted its historical function,
transforming itself in an instrument devoted to eliminate these
asymmetries and to pull the nation out of the conditions of a dependent
and backward country.


Being a medium power imprinted ambiguous features on
Brazil's external behavior. It created subservience during the expansion
of the European international society under the aegis of capitalism in
the first half of the $19^{th}$ century. During the second half of the 19th
century, the conservative elites who ruled the country formulated
external policy objectives and attained them with notable coherence
and rationality of conduct. Thus, the country solved its problem of
labor supply putting an end to the slave trade and attracting free
immigration; established a regional hegemony in the context of the
River Plate Basin, while the national States there were being
consolidated; settled its boundaries according to the uti possidetis
doctrine and assured the autonomy of the foreign trade policy that
had been sacrificed by the unequal treaties concluded with the advanced
capitalist countries at the time of Independence. During the second
half of the $20^{th}$ century, the Brazilian medium power diplomacy
while seeking to attract external factors of development like capital,
foreign investment and technology – tried to lead the Third World in
reforming the international economic order, thus confronting concrete
interests of the advanced powers.


Since the first government of Getúlio Vargas (1930-1945),
development became the vector of the foreign policy, as it was


6 Spektor, Matias. O Brasil e a Argentina entre a cordialidade oficial e o projeto de integração:
a política externa do governo de Ernesto Geisel (1974-1979). Revista Brasileira de Política
Internacional, $n^{\circ}$ 45, v. 1, p. 117-145, 2002. Rapoport, Mario e Cervo, A. L. El Cono Sur:
una historia común. Buenos Aires: Fondo de Cultura Económica, 2001.


346


POLITICAL REGIMES AND BRAZIL'S FOREIGN POLICY


formulated by Chancellor Ramiro Saraiva Guerreiro7. After securing
territorial sovereignty and the delimitation of its boundaries, the
development of the territory became the third successive historical
function of the Brazilian diplomacy, according to the interpretation
of Luiz Felipe de Seixas Corrêa. Development, as a goal, became an
element of the national identity.


In the Brazilian perception, the nation suffered from a certain
inertia and did not respond to the economic challenges in the same
way as this happened in the development process of the majority of
the capitalist countries. Thus, it became the State's task to place the
nation on the route to a capitalist modernization. This process was
initiated by the Brazilian political leaders in the 1930s and maintained
during the following decades in three distinct stages. The first one,
from the 1930s to the 1950s, turned towards the setting-up of a modern
industrial park. The second, from the 1960s to the 1970s, was aimed
at the endowment of the economy with basic elements that would
guarantee its greatest possible autonomy. The third, from the 1970s
onwards, was dedicated to the acquisition and domination of advanced
technology. These phases intersperse with actions and results and,
obviously, did not correspond with periods of a closed or dissociated
economy. What can be perceived, however, is the continuity and the
rationality of a process, inaugurated in the 1930s, which was marked
by the strong presence of the State, and which lasted until the advent
of the neo-liberal governments of Fernando Collor de Mello and
Fernando Henrique Cardoso in the 1990s. The failure of these two
administrations – which were dominated by the objective of external
opening, in contrast to the development policy demanded by public
opinion  explains the election, for the first time in the history of
Brazil, of a leftist government in 2002, a government prepared to


7 Guerreiro, Ramiro Saraiva. Lembranças de um empregado do Itamaraty. São Paulo: Siciliano,
1992. Vizentini, Paulo G. F. Relações internacionais e desenvolvimento. Petrópolis: Vozes,
1995. Albuquerque, José. A. G. (ed.). Sessenta anos de política externa brasileira. São Paulo:
EdUSP, 1996, 4 v.


8 Corrêa. Luiz Felipe de Seixas. Política externa e identidade nacional brasileira, Política
Externa, v. 9, nº 1, 2000, p. 29.


347


AMADO LUIZ CERVO


review the current development model which had substituted with
market forces the State's prime role.


B) THE PARADIGMATIC ANALYSIS APPLIED TO BRAZIL'S FOREIGN POLICY


During the Great Depression of the 1930s Latin America broke
with a model of international insertion, which had been followed since
the time of its Independence, in the beginning of the $19^{th}$ century.
During more than one century the apparatus of the State, maintained
the project of an open economy, exporting primary products and
importing industrial goods – a model convenient to them. The State
was used to serve the interests of these socio-economic hegemonic
groups.


Although a constitutional monarchy, Brazil did not differ from
the Latin American republics, as far as the liberal model of international
insertion was concerned. This model of insertion prevailed in the whole
period from the beginning of the $19^{th}$ century until the 1930s.
However, in the Brazilian case the long period of the liberal-conservative
paradigm suffered some inflections. Between the transfer of the
Portuguese Court to Rio de Janeiro in 1808 and the expiration of the
Commercial Treaty with England in 1844, the country's foreign policy
was subordinated to the paradigm of open doors, with which the
European capitalist countries imposed their interests and the rules of
their international society on the periphery. At this time, the Brazilian
government signed about twenty unequal treaties, which conditioned
the decision-making process and the structures of its international
insertion to the capitalistic order, engendering the situation of
subordination in its international insertion. An outcry against this
subordination of national interests and of the decision-making process
occurred in the 1840s, when a national project with certain degree of
autonomy was formulated. This project continued to guide the
conduction of the country's international relations until the end of


9 Almeida, Paulo Roberto de. Formação da diplomacia econômica no Brasil. As relações econômicas
internacionais no Império. São Paulo: Senac, Funag, 2001.


348


POLITICAL REGIMES AND BRAZIL'S FOREIGN POLICY


the monarchic regime, but did not affect the essence of the liberal-
conservative paradigm of that period, consistent with the so-called
international division of labor.


The Republic, between 1889 and 1930, implemented another
variable of the liberal-conservative paradigm, denominated diplomacy
of agro-exportation by Clodoaldo Bueno.10 This occurred because
the ruling elite, composed of farmers and a stratum of newly enriched
people, had taken the place of the old imperial aristocracy in the control
of the State, using its power to achieve its own aims. The Republic
corresponds, therefore, to a political regime that reduced even more
the definition of national interests, tying it to the objectives of the
hegemonic socio-economic group.


Since 1929, the crisis of capitalism, which affected deeply the
exports of primary goods, combined with social transformations
i.e. growth of the urban masses, birth of an incipient national
bourgeoisie and of embryonic trade union organizations, demand for
employment and industrial products, military and intellectual
dissatisfaction with the century-old backwardness and dependence
explains the slow but steady rupture in the political sphere in the larger
Latin American countries. The liberal-conservative paradigm of foreign
policy did not correspond to this new external and internal conjuncture.
The unilateral regime of open doors, imposed by the capitalist center
and accepted by the Latin American governments, gave way to the
formulation of national projects which imprinted a new direction on
the foreign policies of the region. This new phase had as its archetype
Brazil since 1930 during the Vargas period. It became generalized with
the ascension to power of Juan Domingo Perón in Argentina, the
nationalization of petroleum in Mexico and the willingness of almost
all great and small States in the region to support the expansion of
secondary industries. Paradoxically, the worldwide crisis of capitalism
immersed Latin America in a process of fast modernization, eagerly
welcomed by the new political leaders. The origins of this dramatic


10 Bueno, Clodoaldo. A República e sua política exterior, 1889 a 1902. São Paulo: UNESP/Funag,
1995.


349


AMADO LUIZ CERVO


change towards national development can be found less in the rupture
of political regimes in different Latin American countries and much
more in the succession of the leading social groups. The old elites of
the primary economy had lost power to a new urban leadership with
a modern vision of their interests and of international relations. 11


The division of the world in antagonistic blocks facilitated the
work of these new elites. They negotiated their adhesion to the war of
the others in exchange for assistance to industry, export credit, private
investments, etc. Until the eruption of World War II, Latin America
opened its economies to international competition. This provoked
initiatives by rival powers – especially Germany, Italy, France, Great-
Britain, United States, Japan, Soviet Union –, which now became
preoccupied with their presence not exclusively in the consumer
markets, but chiefly in the local productive system, that was expanding
and diversifying.


Since 1935 Brazil's foreign trade policy represents a concrete
example of this change. It was guided by three principles: firstly, to
take advantage of the rivalry between the antagonistic blocks that
divided the world, with the intent to increase internal competition
and external bargaining power; secondly, to maintain liberal trade with
the United States, forcing this country to take decisions that were
required by Brazil's new bargaining power; thirdly, to carry out barter
trade with Germany and Italy, which was considered more adequate
to the expansion of national industry.


The war created another favorable condition for Latin America's
development policy. The continental solidarity became a preponderant
factor in the strategic calculations of Roosevelt's government, which
was willing to strengthen the economic base of the Southern neighbors,
especially because this represented an important factor in the war efforts.
In the Vargas' period Brazil knew how to manipulate with great ability


11 The paradigmatic change in the regional dimension is described in my book Relações
internacionais da América Latina: velhos e novos paradigmas, cited. See furthermore: Seitenfus,
Ricardo A. S. O Brasil de Getúlio Vargas e a formação dos blocos, 1930-1942. São Paulo: Ed.
Nacional, 1985. Moura, Gerson. Sucessos e ilusões. Relações internacionais do Brasil durante a
após a Segunda Guerra Mundial. Rio de Janeiro: Fundação Getúlio Vargas, 1991.


350


POLITICAL REGIMES AND BRAZIL'S FOREIGN POLICY


this bilateral cooperation, while Argentina insisted on its neutrality,
which was seen with reluctance by the United States' Department
of State.


Therefore between 1930 and 1945 Latin America embarked
on a new path with their States starting to orient foreign policy by a
new paradigm. This was a convergent movement, although with
different intensities among the governments. This conceptual change
was little perceptible in the diplomatic language, with some exceptions;
for instance, the messages of Vargas to the National Congress, in which
he interpreted the diplomatic game as an egoistic economic game of
the greater powers, related to the accomplishment of unilateral national
interests. The change was more perceptible in the decision-making
process. The governments of the region attempted to imitate the greater
powers stressing unilateral action in the accomplishment of external
objectives, which became directly tied to internal gains, identified as
development gains. Those, in turn, became identical with the expansion
of secondary industry.


Industrialization became, thus, the object of foreign policy,
because it was expected from industry the increase of wealth, the
provision of security, the opening of business for the national
bourgeoisie, the expansion of employment for the urban masses
and the modernization of the society as a whole - according to
the judgment of the enlightened elite.12


The analysis made so far of the Latin American experience of
that period places in the background the weight of political regimes in
the explanation of the for the origin of the new paradigm of
international insertion. The States of the region were governed by new
leaders, who alienated the old oligarchies of the liberal-conservative
age. These new elites adapted the understanding of national interest to
the demands of a society in transformation. Thus, we can identify as
components of the new paradigm of foreign policy some conceptual
elements, such as: the idea that the decision-making process must be


12 From my book, cited in the last note, p. 53-54.


351


AMADO LUIZ CERVO


nourished by adequate perceptions of the national interests; the notion
that reciprocal gains must be attained in international relations, via
negotiation; the objective of overcoming inequalities among nations;
and, finally, a cooperative vision of world, permitting accomplishment
of mutual interests among the peoples.


The genesis of the paradigm, which we will call Developmental
State, occurred in Latin America between 1930 and 1945, under the
impulse of social transformations which required a new pattern of
conduct by the State. In its origin, the paradigm added to Brazil's
foreign policy, specifically, three parameters: a) the perception that
foreign policy should realize interests distinct from those of the previous
phase; b) the perception that foreign policy should supplement the
internal effort of development, displaying a new historical functionality;
c) the perception that the efficiency of the diplomacy in achieving
development-related results depended on the autonomy of the decision-
making process; on the cooperative or non-conflictive character of the
external relations; on a flexible and pragmatic foreign trade policy; on
the prevalence of the economic objective over geopolitical alliance; on
security; on the strategic partnership and international politics and, at
last, on a balance in the negotiation with the great powers and the
neighboring countries.


In Brazil, the ratio of the Developmental State prevailed over
governments and political regimes during sixty years, between 1930
and 1989. However, as it had occurred with the liberal-conservative
paradigm, the new paradigm of Brazil's international relations also
suffered inflections.


The elements which composed the paradigm between 1930 and
1945, identified above, are not sufficient to explain continuity and
change during sixty years. The paradigm was invented by the statesmen.
Since the 1950s, economists of the Economic Commission for Latin
America (Ecla/Cepal) had not only adopted the new paradigm but
strengthened it in its economic dimension, improving the concepts of
economic planning, center-periphery, industrialization, internal market,
employment, national income, declining terms of trade etc. Two
moments were important in the consolidation of the Developmental


352


POLITICAL REGIMES AND BRAZIL'S FOREIGN POLICY


State paradigm of foreign policy in Brazil: the conceptual definition
elaborated in the 1960s and the operational viability demonstrated in
the 1970s.


The Brazilian political and diplomatic thought applied to the
country's international relations has not been homogeneous, as far as
the implicit development model for the foreign policy was concerned.
There wasagreement between statesmen, intellectuals, diplomats, the
military, politicians and leaders of social movements over one point:
foreign policy should support the national development project.
However, the Brazilian political thought was divided over the model
of development to be implemented. This split deepened in the 1960s,
when the different tendencies of the Brazilian public opinion radicalized.
The movement provoked, finally, a clearer definition of the
paradigmatic concept of Developmental State.


On one side there were the defenders of development associated
with the forces of international capitalism; on the other, the protagonists
of the independent national development. Although both lines of
thought overlapped in a wide zone of convergence, they were sufficiently
distinct and coherent to suggest two strategies of international insertion.


The tendency of associated development – whose representatives
were, in the 1950s, João Neves da Fontoura, and, in the following
decade, Castello Branco's group of the military, which had taken power
in 1964, as well as the pro-Western chancellors Vasco Leitão da Cunha
and Juracy Magalhães – involved extensive and cohesive parameters of
foreign policy. Its protagonists advocated a development supported
from outside by the forces of the international capitalism. The special
relations with the United States – the matrix of the system – would be
placed above any other variable of conduct. Important factors of
development, such as capital, enterprises and technology, as well as
political and ideological influence, would come mainly from the United
States. For this model the required internal conditions would be a
regulatory system favorable to the penetration by these elements, on
one hand, and, on the other, an alliance in terms of international politics,
geopolitics and security. The sphere of international economic relations
merged, therefore, with the political and ideological sphere. This meant


353


AMADO LUIZ CERVO


adhesion to the doctrine of collective security, under North American
hegemony, during the Cold War. 13


The independent development – conceived by thinkers like
Araújo Castro, San Tiago Dantas, Hélio Jaguaribe and the nationalistic
military who took power in 1967 – involved different parameters of
external behavior. Its protagonists desired a development sustained by
internal forces, i.e. development which would be less dependent on
capital, enterprises and technology from external sources. The relations
with the United States, as well as the Cold War divisions, would lose
importance in the view of the decision-makers. Security would be
dislodged from the collective ideology of the west and would be
associated with the effort aimed at economic and technological
development. Solidarity with the Third World would be a natural
result of this strategy and the foreign policy would raise the flag of a
new international economic order. The regional environment would
be seen as an area of convergence and expansion of interests of an even
more robust national economy. 14


The decade of 1960 saw the radicalization of these two tendencies
of political thought. Between 1961 and 1964, the so-called
Independent Foreign Policy was formulated. In 1964 occurred the
military coup, and in 1967, a coup inside the coup, which led to a
political reversion of the military regime. It can be argued that it was a
decade of conceptual advance. In the 1970s, when the maturity of the
development process allowed it, the penetration of the executive sphere
by the idea of independent development became more perceptible
from an operational point of view.15


13 Dreifuss, René Armand. A internacional capitalista: estratégia e táticas do empresariado
transnacional, 1918-1986. Rio de Janeiro: Espaço e Tempo, 1987. Idem, 1964: a conquista
do Estado. Petrópolis: Vozes, 1981.


14 Jaguaribe, Hélio. O nacionalismo na atualidade brasileira. Rio de Janeiro: Instituto Superior
de Estudos Brasileiros, 1958. Dantas, San Tiago. Política Externa Independente. Rio de
Janeiro: Civilização Brasileira, 1962. Storrs, Keith Larry. Brazil's Independent Foreign Policy,
1961-1964. Cornell University, 1973, PhD Dissertation. Manzur, Tânia M. P. G. Opinião
pública e política exterior nos governos de Jânio Quadros e João Goulart (1961 a 1964).
Universidade de Brasília, 2000, Tese de Doutorado.


15 Ligiéro, Luiz Fernando. Políticas semelhantes em momentos diferentes: exame e comparação
entre Política Externa Independente (1961-1964) e Pragmatismo Responsável (1974-1979).


354


POLITICAL REGIMES AND BRAZIL'S FOREIGN POLICY


As a whole, during the sixty years of development policy, i.e.
between 1930 and 1989, the parameters of thought of the protagonists
of independent development prevailed. There was, however, a
permanent dialogue between the two lines of thought. During the
period of the development paradigm, the genius of Brazilian political
intelligence succeeded in balancing the two external strategies. The
result was continuity and coherence in the decision-making process.
Moreover, the progress made by Brazil between 1930 and 1989 owes
much to a foreign policy based on an old balance between distinct
conceptions derived from a complex society. The continuity of the
development paradigm was not threatened by institutional ruptures
of the political regime. This continuity is responsible for the
maintenance of the decision-making autonomy in the political sphere,
as well as for the creation of a strong national economic nucleus that
pulled the country out of the economic and social infancy in which
the liberal-conservative paradigm had kept it for more than a century.
Being composed of a hybrid political thought, the Brazilian
development became open to the forces of international capitalism.
Still, it was sustained by an internally autonomous decision-making
process. Diplomacy was thus able to exhibit a proper nationalism,
which was universalistic, cooperative and ideology-free. The Brazilian
experience was very different from the Argentinean one, where the
institutional ruptures, much more numerous, were accompanied by a
destructive will towards previous concepts and objectives. In Argentina
there was an alternation of paradigms; in Brazil, a continuity. 16


The transition from the military regime to civilian rule in 1985
apparently did not affect foreign policy, especially because this transition
had been prepared since 1974 by the so-called “political opening".
Two facts may illustrate this assertion. Bilateral cooperation – that


Universidade de Brasília, 2000, Tese de Doutorado. Pinheiro, Letícia. Foreign policy decision-
making under the Geisel government. The President, the military and the foreign ministry. London
School of Economics and Political Sciences, 1994, PhD Dissertation


16 Guimarães, Samuel Pinheiro (ed.). Argentina: visões brasileiras. Brasília: Ipri-Funag, 2000.
See, particularly, my text in this collective work, "A política exterior da Argentina, 1945-
2000", р. 11-88.


355


AMADO LUIZ CERVO


was to lead to regional integration with the creation of an axis between
the Brazil of Sarney and Argentina of Alfonsín – had started to gain
strength under the military regimes, with of agreements on the
development of the rivers of the River Plate Basin and cooperation in
the nuclear sector. On the other hand, the Brazilian thesis concerning
the solution of conflicts in Central America has also survived the change
produced by the succession of regimes.17


The paradigmatic change of the Brazilian foreign policy that
led to the abandonment of the development strategy did not result
from a regime change, because from 1990 onwards it occurred within
the democratic regime. The neo-liberal governments which rose to
power in the principal Latin America States in 1989-1990 – Péres in
Venezuela, Fugimori in Peru, Gortari in Mexico, Menem in Argentine
and Collor de Mello in Brazil – had displayed a notable convergence
of thought and intentions with relation to the international insertion
of their countries. Therefore the introduction of a new paradigm of
foreign policy in Brazil was not an invention of the Brazilian political
intelligence, it was, above all, an adhesion to a regional consensus.


In our studies on Latin America's international relations,
particularly in comparing foreign policies of Brazil and Argentine, we
have elaborated the concept of the normal State (Estado normal)
substituting the Developmental State (Estado desenvolvimentista), in
order to comprehend the new paradigm which became disseminated
over the region. Although an early experience of the new paradigm
had been launched by the military regime of Augusto Pinochet in
Chile, it was adopted with enthusiasm chiefly by the democratic
governments of the 1990's. 18


17 Avila, Carlos F. D. Opondo-se ao intervencionismo: o Brasil frente ao conflito regional na
América Central (1979-1996). Universidade de Brasília, Tese de Doutorado, 2003.


18 The paradigmatic concepts of development-aimed State, normal State and logistic State were
defined in the last chapter of the books Relações Internacionais da América Latina, velhos e
novos paradigmas and História da Política Exterior de Brasil, as well as in two articles of the
Revista Brasileira de Política Internacional, cited in note 3. See furthermore: Bandeira, Moniz.
Estado nacional e política internacional na América Latina (1930-1992. São Paulo: Ensaio,
1992. Bernal-Meza, Raúl. Sistema mundial y Mercosur: globalización, regionalismo y políticas
exteriores comparadas. Buenos Aires: Grupo Editor Latinoamericano, 2000.


356


POLITICAL REGIMES AND BRAZIL'S FOREIGN POLICY


The introduction of the development paradigm in the 1930s
was caused by two strands of determination. Externally, the capitalistic
crisis affected the primary economy of the Latin American countries,
turning obvious the disadvantages of the international division of labor
established between center and periphery in the previous century.
Internally, the social transformations required a diversification of
economic activities, particularly the expansion of secondary industries.


The introduction of the paradigm of the normal State in the
1990s was also a response to external and internal impulses. Externally,
the collapse of socialism, the triumph of the market economy and the
mirage of globalization had taken the Latin American elites to consider
that it was also convenient to put an end to the experience of the
Developmentat State. Internally, the crisis caused the crisis of the external
debt of the 1980s, followed by economic recession and was interpreted
as a consequence of the paradigm in force.


The neo-liberal governments considered the supremacy of the
market and the withdrawal of the State as logical consequences of
democracy. For these politicians, therefore, there was a nexus between
the democratic system and the political paradigm, a link that, during
the 1980s, had been ignored by the presidents of Brazil and Argentina,
Sarney and Alfonsín. The normal State, this typical invention of Latin
American political intelligence in the 1990s, represented, however, in
historical perspective, a retrogression. Its more complete model is Carlos
Saúl Menem's government (1989-1999) in Argentina, a government
which became responsible for the bankruptcy of the nation. 19


The normal State – initiated in Brazil in 1990 during the
government of Collor de Mello and consolidated under Fernando
Henrique Cardoso during his two mandates (1994-2002) – did not
mean an adoption of the parameters of globalization or interdependence,
as it occurred, for example, with the international relations of Spain
and Portugal in the same period. The change in the Brazilian foreign
policy in the 1990s, due to the indiscriminate opening of the economy,


19 Rapoport, Mario. Historia económica, política y social de la Argentina (1880-2000). Buenos
Aires: Macchi, 2000. Sevares, Julio. Por qué cayó la Argentina: imposición, crisis y reciclaje del
orden neoliberal. Buenos Aires: Norma, 2002.


357


AMADO LUIZ CERVO


has deepened the country's structural dependencies in relation to the
exterior. The logic of the historical evolution was interrupted by
blocking a development process which had been under way since the
1930s. The experience of the 1930s – when the paradigmatic change
provoked a dramatic advance in terms of national development – was
not repeated in the 1990s under the sign of neo-liberalism. During
the first period, the government led internal and external forces to a
qualitative advance, reaching a new level of development. During the
neo-liberal reign, the government introduced a strategy of destruction
of the national forces, permitting its appropriation and control by the
interests of transnational capitalism.


In effect, from a political perspective, the normal State has
revealed itself subservient by sacrificing the autonomy of foreign policy
and accepting the so-called Washington Consensus – that is, orders
coming from the center of capitalism
as an inspiration for the
decision-making process. The notion of national interest became sterile,
since those orders dictated the interests of the advanced countries. From
an economic perspective, the normal State has showed itself destructive
firstly, by dissolving the robust nucleus of the national economy,
alienating to the exterior the assets of privatized companies; secondly,
by transfering national income to the exterior in an alarming volume,
either via shares or financial speculation. From a historical perspective,
the normal State has shown itself regressive, pushing the national
economy towards the primary sector, reestablishing thus, in certain
way, the liberal-conservative paradigm of the 19th century.


Fernando Henrique Cardoso – who dominated the political
thought and foreign policy, and made possible the emergence of the
paradigm of the normal State – fought with destructive will the
concepts and intentions of the Developmental State. Nevertheless, due
to his intelligence, he was not as consistent as his Argentinean colleague
in the implementation of the three parameters of the normal State.
On a small scale Cardoso preserved the influence of certain principles
and intentions of the previous phase and has sown the seeds of another
paradigm of external behavior, that we call logistic State, reproducing


358


POLITICAL REGIMES AND BRAZIL'S FOREIGN POLICY


timidly the mature behavior of advanced countries, which continue
to defend their national interests in the age of globalization.


During the election campaign which resulted in the victory of
Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, the central argument, which convinced public
opinion, consisted of criticism of Cardoso's model. 20 This model would
have deepened the social exclusion in Brazil as well as the structural
dependencies of the exterior. In other words, it had not created a mature
insertion into the world of global interdependence and it had not
promoted the economic growth necessary for the inclusion of the poor
into a welfare society. The public opinion endorsed the will of the
candidate of the Labor Party's (Partido dos Trabalhadores) to put an
end to the experience of normal State – subservient, destructive and
regressive as it is.


CONCLUSIONS


The movement diplomacy is submitted to an agenda determined
in great measure by factors independent of the will of the government
an individual country. This is true both to the multilateral and bilateral
spheres, since the object of negotiations must be agreed collectively or,
at least, bilaterally. Foreign policy gives content to diplomacy. It is
associated directly with the objectives which a specific government, or
a group of States, wants to realize with its external action. International
relations are determined by the game of forces inherent in diplomacy,
foreign policies and societies.


Foreign policy presupposes the existence of a national project,
that has distinct names in different historical experiences, as the
American manifest destiny, the French grand dessein of De Gaulle, the
national project of development in Brazil since the 1930s.


The political regime is related to these three dimensions of the
international life. However, its influence can be attenuated to the point


20 Guimarães, Samuel Pinheiro; Ferreira, Oliveiros, Cervo, A. Brasil no Mundo. In: Morhy,
Lauro. Brasil em questão: a Universidade e a eleição presidencial. Brasília: EdUnB, 2002,
v. 1 p. 53-84.


359


AMADO LUIZ CERVO


of its submergence under the influences of the national project and
the components of society, such as culture, demography, ideology and
economy.


The multiple causes analysis of Brazil's international relations
and the paradigmatic analysis of its foreign policy allow us to isolate
variables that explain both the prevalence of the foreign policy's
continuity over the change of regimes and the change of the foreign
policy in a situation of continuity of the regime. In other words, there
is not necessary causal linkage between political regime and foreign
policy.


The nexus of influence is established when the new ruling elite
in power conceives the national project in distinct manner, or, at least,
intends to modify it or to elevate it to a new level. However, the
regime's nature – democratic or authoritarian
can be considered
irrelevant in these cases.


Brazil's re-democratization in 1945 and the military coup of
1964 had almost identical impacts on the direction of the foreign
policy. In both cases, the intentions of the leaders coincided. In the
economic sphere, both regimes advocated the deepening of the
association with the forces of international capitalism and, in the
political and ideological sphere, the alignment with liberal Western
values, principles and standards of behavior proposed by the United
States.


The two re-democratization processes of 1945 and 1985 did
not coincide in their influence on foreign policy. In the first case, the
foreign policy accepted the influence of the West, breaking with the
paradigm of Vargas first government. In the second case, re-
democratization gave continuity to the nationalism present in the
paradigm followed before, during the military regime.


The two phases of the Brazilian military regime, 1964-67 and
1967-85, did not coincide in their foreign policy formulations. The
first phase, short and ephemeral, tended to follow the intentions of
the re-democratization of 1945. The second recovered the national
project engendered operationally by the political intelligence of the
1930s and defined conceptually by the democrats in the years 1960.


360


POLITICAL REGIMES AND BRAZIL'S FOREIGN POLICY


The Brazilian adhesion to the Cold War harvested enthusiasm
of some democratic and of some military governments, as it harvested
indifference and disdain of other military or democratic governments.


Finally, Brazilian adhesion to neo-liberalism in the Post Cold
War era was not tied to the political regime. Fernando Henrique
Cardoso (1994-2002) adopted a fundamentalist neo-liberalism. His
successor, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, in a magnificent demonstration
of the democratic game, was elected on the basis of the argument that
the neo-liberal model was bankrupt.


Brazil's foreign policy was closed inside a cocoon, where a
diplomatic body has resided since the 1960s, professionally qualified
by the mechanisms of formation and functional ascension. This
professional body has detained a political legacy – the development
paradigm – and has made to prevail the continuity of the foreign policy
over changes deriving from the alternation of governments and political
regimes. The cocoon blew up suddenly during Cardoso's era, but for
reasons detached from this alternation. In the case of Argentina, the
cocoon of the Peronist Tercera Posición blew up early, making foreign
policy much more sensitive to the institutional ruptures suffered by
the country. The comparison of the two experiences reveals, therefore,
that it is the very existence of a national project - capable to induce a
paradigm – which conditions the causal link between political regime,
foreign policy and international relations.


361


CONTRIBUTORS


1. José Flávio Sombra Saraiva is Professor of International Relations
at the University of Brasilia, Brazil, and Director-General of
Brazilian Institute of International Relations (IBRI).


2. Andrew Hurrell is Professor at Nuffield College, Oxford University,
England.


3. Robert Frank is the Director of Institut Pierre Renouvin, Paris,
and General-Secretary at the Comission of the History of
International Relations, France.


4. Didier Musiedlak, is Professor of History of International Relations
at the University of Paris X, France.


5. Vladimir Kulagin is Professor of International Relations at the
University of Moscow, MGIMO, Russia.


6.


Denis Rolland is Professor of History of International Relations
at the University of Strasbourg, France.


7. Cristopher Coker is Professor of International Relations at the
London School of Economics and Political Sciences, England.


8. Mario Rapoport and Claudio Spiguel are Professors of Economics
and History of International Relations at the University of Buenos
Aires, Argentina.


9. Raúl Bernal-Meza is Professor of International Relations at the
National University of Centro and at the University of Buenos
Aires, Argentina.


10. Wolfgang Döpcke is Professor of African History and History of
International Relations at the University of Brasilia, Brazil.


11. Thomas Skidmore is Professor Emeritus of History at the Watson
Institute, Brown University, United States.


12. Amado L. Cervo is Professor of History of International Relations
at the University of Brasilia, Brazil.


363


|  |  |

| --- | --- |

|  |  |

|  |  |

|  |  |

|  |  |

|  |  |

|  |  |

|  |  |

|  |  |

|  |  |

|  |  |

|  |  |

|  |  |

|  |  |

Printed and Finished by: Teixeira Gráfica e Editora Ltda.
